---
title: "Frankenstein: or, The Modern Prometheus  (1818, rev. 1831);  The Last Man (1826)"
format: "book"
category: "s"
yearReleased: "1826"
author: "Mary Shelley"
---
In one respect Mary Shelley is the prime example of association between SF and anarchism: for the mother of science fiction was daughter to the father of anarchism, William Godwin, and wife to the Godwinian Percy Bysshe Shelley. Critical opinions differ, however, as to how much Godwin's philosophy influenced her works, or for that matter P.B. Shelley's own brand of Godwinism.  Though the influence on her upbringing must have been considerable, she chose to  keep her distance from radicalism. As she wrote in her journal, "I believe we  are sent here to educate ourselves, and that self-denial, and disappointment,  and self-control, are a part of our education; that it is not by taking away all  restraining law that our improvement is to be achieved; and, though many things  need great amendment, I can by no means go so far as my friends would have me."  (quoted in Spark 1952: 5) It seems likely that this reflects the strongly feminist influence of Mary Shelley's mother, Mary Wollstonecraft.

_Frankenstein_, now widely regarded as the first work of modern science fiction, is too well-known to need description here. On its appearance it bore a dedication to Godwin; and it's noteworthy that Shelley had been re-reading her father's great work _Political Justice_ in 1817, whilst writing _Frankenstein_: one entry in her journal (13 April 1817) actually reads "Correct Frankenstein; read Political Justice" (Shelley 1947: 78). Godwin read the proofs of _Frankenstein_ in October 1817, and Fiona Sampson suggests that, as Shelley recorded making alterations to the novel directly after her father's departure, the alterations may have reflected his discussions with her (Sampson 2018: 157). Godwin subsequently praised the work in his letters to his daughter. On 15 November 1822 he described the novel as "a fine thing; it was compressed, muscular, and firm; nothing relaxed and weak; no proud flesh." (Marshall 1889: II.52) And by 14 February 1823 he could write that "_Frankenstein_ is universally known, and though it can never be a book for vulgar reading, is everywhere respected." (ibid.: II.68). He himself oversaw the production of the book's second edition in 1823, while Mary was still in Italy.

Critic John Rieder, in his 2008 _Colonialism and the Emergence of Science Fiction_, considered that the novel "serves the polemical function of arguing that criminality is not inherent, but rather is produced by political injustice, along lines that derive from the rationalist philosophy of Shelley's father, William Godwin's, _Political Justice_". More  recently (2013), John Zerzan has described _Frankenstein_ as "a  classic warning about the hubris of technology's combat against nature".

Anthony Galluzzo, in a long <a href="https://www.boundary2.org/tag/nick-land/">article</a> on Godwin and Malthus in 2018, described _Political Justice_ as "a text in which Godwin also predicts a future when human beings, perfected through the force of reason, would achieve a sexless, sleepless, god-like immortality, in what is a 1790s-era version of the technological Singularity. Godwin's daughter,"; he says, "drew on this vision in crafting her own Victor Frankenstein." He describes Victor Frankenstein, straightforwardly, as her "Godwin avatar."

Richard Gough Thomas, in his 2019 _William Godwin, a Political Life_, considers _Frankenstein_'s debt to Godwin is obvious, but notes too her philosophical independence from her father: "In Godwin's novels, characters espouse moral principles that they fail to live up to; in _Frankenstein_, the principles themselves are open to question ( . . . )."

_The Last Man_, though historically important in SF as a very early post-catastrophe story, is overwhelmingly tedious, and was understandably out of print for over a century. The character of Lionel's father, as described in the novel's opening pages, has been seen as a portrait of William Godwin (Luke 1965: xii). In an 1824 letter from Godwin to the author he gave at best lukewarm opinions on the extracts she had sent him.
 
