---
yearReleased: "2013"
category: "s"
format: "book"
author: "John Shirley"
title: "Transmaniacon (1979); Three-Ring Psychus (1980);New Taboos plus"
---
The protagonist of Transmaniacon  is described as "punk, anarchic, exorbitant, his mind evacuated of normal  constraints, death-loving." (<a href="http://www.sf-encyclopedia.com/Entry/shirley_john">SFE</a>)
  
 Three-Ring Psychus is a real  curiosity, with a vision of 'The Great Unweighting', in which Jung's collective  unconscious asserts itself and allows people control over their own gravitation,  flitting about in a surreal vision reminiscent of Magritte's Golconda. A  metaphor for freedom, this 'Upping' leads to a complete revisioning of society  with thousands of micro-polities; the lead character explicitly feels "an  increasing kinship with the anarchist viewpoint" (Zebra edn, p150).
 
Rudy Rucker, Terry Bisson and John Shirley  were on a panel on Anarchism and Science Fiction at the March 2012 San Francisco  Anarchist Book Fair, which is available as a <a href="http://www.rudyrucker.com/blog/mp3/rucker_bisson_shirley_anarchist_book_fair_san_francisco_march_31_2012.mp3"> podcast</a> on Rucker's website.
 
New Taboos plus is a short  collection of a novella, two essays, an interview, and a bibliography. Luther  Blissett's Medium.com review was reproduced in the online  Freedom in  2017. Asked, in the interview, how he would describe his politics, Shirley said:
 
While I can see some virtue in some selfishness, and I  believe in independent thinking and constantly critiquing government, I think we  still have a profound need for a well-organized, democratic, centralized  government. I have a streak of socialist in me, but I believe in a free market  modified by regulation; capitalism modified by, for example, socialized  medicine, social safety nets. It's not a choice between government and anarchy.  It's about allowing some space for the anarchic in a structured society.