---
category: "s"
author: "Norman Spinrad"
format: "book"
title: "Agent of Chaos (1967); Bug Jack Barron (1969);  'Heirloom' (1972); The Iron Dream (1972);The Void Captain's Tale (1983); Child of Fortune (1985); Little Heroes (1987); Greenhouse Summer(1999); Raising Hell plus"
yearReleased: "(2015)"
---
Agent of Chaos concerns an underground movement which ideologises entropy as leading to chaos, and fights against the total control of the Hegemony over the solar system. Said to have influenced young American radical-anarchists in the 1970s (Platt:70), though it's hard to see why; there is, however, a passage in chapter 11 in which the concept of freedom is linked to that of the infinity of the universe, which equation is perhaps at the root of the attractiveness of sf for many anarchists and libertarians.
 
'Heirloom' is a minor anarchistic story, wholly derivative of Russell's '. . . And Then There Were None.'
 
For Michael Moorcock The Iron Dream—a heroic fantasy novel supposedly written by Adolf Hitler—was "intended to display the fascist elements inherent to the form." (Moorcock 1978) But for P.S., the same year, "Taken in small doses it is very funny. But the parody of fascism repeated over and over again numbs the mind and becomes a subliminal play for fascism."Zeke Teflon, however, considers it one of his favourite anarchist science fiction novels, describing it as "Alternately chilling and darkly funny. [ . . . ] An excellent illustration of the ugliness of the authoritarian psyche."
 
For Moorcock Spinrad used Bug Jack Barron to "display the abuse of democracy and the media in America." (Moorcock 1978)
 
"Spinrad says: 'Child of Fortune is another anarchist novel, because there's no government.'" (Dan Clore) The message of the book is unequivocal:
 
"True Children of Fortune have no chairmen of the board or kings. True Children of Fortune seek not after chairmen of the board or kings. Certainement, no true Child of Fortune wouldwish to be a chairman of the board or king!" (Bantam edn: 495)
 The Void Captain's Tale is also set in a society with no government. (Lise Andreasen, posting to anarchysf mailing list, 2010)
 
 Little Heroes  and  Greenhouse Summer are included in Killjoy'slist of stories that feature sympathetic anarchist characters. Spinrad has said that his model, in Greenhouse Summer,"is some form of syndicalist anarchism—'anarchism that knows how to do business'—no national governments per se." (Shirley)Greenhouse Summer is also included inTeflon's list.
 
Raising Hell plus is one of the excellent PM Press Outspoken authors series. It was reviewed favourably byZeke Teflon on its release; andLuther Blissett, for Freedom, summed it up as "Fun story. Punchy essay. Well worth buying and reading."
 
In a 1999 interview Spinrad confirmed that he was "an anarchist—but I'm a syndicalist. You have to have organized anarchy, because otherwise it doesn't work.' (Killjoy,2009)