---
category: "s"
author: "Neal Stephenson"
format: "book"
title: "Snow Crash (1992); The Diamond Age (1995); Cryptonomicon (1999); The Baroque Cycle—Quicksilver  (2003), The Confusion  (2004), and System of the World (2004); Anathem (2008); Seveneves"
yearReleased: "(2015)"
---
A form of anarcho-capitalism plays a major role in many of these entertaining novels. In Snow Crash, territory is primarily controlled by corporate franchises, termed "Franchise-Operated Quasi-National Entities" such as "Mr Lee's Greater Hong Kong" and "Nova Sicilia," with privately-operated police and judicial systems, where the landscape has been turned into a patchwork quilt of franchise enclave communities, and the increasingly residual federal government is just one more competitor in a free market for sovereignty services.
 
It's always been a mystery [ . . . ], but then, that's how the government is. It was invented to do stuff that private enterprise doesn't bother with, which means that there's probably no reason for it; you never know what they're doing or why. (ch. 63)
Its sequel, The Diamond Age, depicts a more mature anarcho-capitalist society where Common Law and other international private law conventions have evolved into a Common Economic Protocol to which all non-outlaw phyles and FOQNEs subscribe in their own legal systems.
 
The Baroque Cycle is described by the Left Bank Books reviewer as "Kick-ass historical sci fi [ . . . ] Very funny and intelligent read." It also one of Mark Bould's selections in Red Planets. The final volume, The System of the World, won the 2005 Prometheus Award.
 
Cryptonomicon won the 2013 Libertarian Futurist Society's Hall of Fame Award.
 
Anathem is a long discursive novel set on an alternate Earth. Described byZeke Teflon as "excellent", anarchistClark at Popehat has this to say:
 
Anathem has it all: deep history, parallel worlds, medieval monasteries, formal logic, quantum uncertainty, cross-polar chase scenes, orbital mechanics, starships. A lot of people say that they thought that Anathem was too wordy or too weird. I feel bad for them – they've admitted something very embarrassing about themselves in public.
I wouldn't say it's too weird, but it's definitely much too long, and plain dull: a worthy failure, I would say. I guess I've now embarrassed myself in public.
 
Seveneves is another doorstop of a book: the Moon is blown up in a cosmic collision, and most of humanity dies in the 5000 year pounding by lunar debris; a tiny colony survives in orbiting space habitats, and in the final third of the book it transpires that there have also been survivors on Earth, above and below the sea. 
 
For Zeke Teflon, reviewing atSharp and Pointed, the book is "all but unreadable," with way too much exposition, to the extent that he feels 2–300 pages could usefully have been cut; he was unable to recommend it. Nevertheless, the novel won the 2016 Prometheus Award.
 