---
yearReleased: "1921"
category: "s"
format: "book"
author: "George Bernard Shaw"
title: "Back to Methuselah"
---
Shaw was familiar with anarchist literature—references to Godwin, Bakunin, Proudhon, Kropotkin, Tucker, and Tolstoy abound in his work; among these he was on fairly close personal terms with Kropotkin and Tucker; and in the 1880s he was familiar with British anarchists such as Charlotte Wilson, Henry Seymour and Joseph Lane.
 
Several times he contributed articles to anarchist publications: 'What's in a Name? (How an  Anarchist Might Put It)' in 1885 to The Anarchist, Britain's first  anarchist paper; 'Strikes. (From the State Socialist Point of View)' in 1890 to Freedom; 'The Quintessence of Ibsenism' in 1891 to the American  Liberty and 'Why I Am a Social-Democrat' in 1894 to the British Liberty.
 
The first of these appeared to be  pro-anarchist, and was later published by anarchists as 'Anarchism versus State  Socialism'; Shaw always subsequently claimed that the views he had described  were not his own. By 1888 he was firmly entrenched in his own brand of Fabianism—he  wrote in a letter that "I am no anarchist: I am a practical politician" (Shaw  1965: 184); and in the same year he gave a lecture at the Communist Club on  'Anarchism refuted' (Amalric 1977). In 1891 he published 'The Impossibilities of  Anarchism', his definitive denunciation; in this work he found individualist  anarchism unacceptable because it failed to tackle the problem of inequitable  distribution, and communist anarchism also unacceptable since it failed to offer  an incentive to labour without coercion. His opinions of anarchism received no  later substantial revision.
 
Back to Methuselah is an episodic dream of human evolution from Genesis to the 32nd millennium; humanity by 31920 had outgrown corporeal life and exists on a spiritual plane only. It has been suggested that some of the Lamarckian ideas used here by Shaw may have been suggested by Kropotkin, who had published a number of articles on the inheritance of acquired characteristics in The Nineteenth Century and After in 1910 (Hulse). Woodcock considered that the theme Shaw chose for development in this play was Godwinian (Woodcock 1962: 86).