---
date: git Last Modified
layout: libdoc_page.liquid
permalink: starhawk/index.html
tags:
- S
- book
title: "Starhawk - The Fifth Sacred Thing (1993); City of Refuge (2015)"
---

Starhawk describes _The Fifth Sacred Thing_ as an [. . .] "epic  tale, set in 2048, California. In a time of ecological collapse, when the  hideously authoritarian and corporate-driven Stewards have taken control of most  of the land and set up an apartheid state, one region has declared itself  independent: the Bay Area and points north. Choosing life over guns, they have  created a simple but rich ecotopia, where no one wants, nothing is wasted,  culture and cooperation are uppermost, and the Four Sacred Things [earth, air,  fire, and water] are valued unconditionally." (<a href="http://www.starhawk.org/writings/fifth-sacred-thing.html">Starhawk's  website</a>).

The author is a neo-pagan activist.  In terms of practical politics she describes herself as now "actually more of a  progressive democrat" (Killjoy 2009; also <a href="http://www.tangledwilderness.org/pdfs/mmlb14-starhawk-web.pdf">here</a>).  For John P. Clark this is perhaps the only work of fiction "that has made a  major contribution to anarchistic utopianism" since Le Guin's (Clark 2009: 22).  Also recommended by <a href="http://www.infoshop.org/pdfs/AnarchyWorks.pdf"> Gelderloos</a>.
 David Graeber's 2009 _Direct Action. An Ethnography_ has five pages recounting a 2001 meeting with Starhawk. Initially suspicious of her as rather an anarchist celebrity, he writes "I don't know exactly what we were expecting, but at the very least one imagines an anarchist witch would be at least a little bit outré. Instead, what we encountered was one of the most pleasant, reasonable people imaginable. Everything about her was open, friendly, and completely down-to-earth." Ron Sakolsky, writing in _Fifth Estate_ #355 in 2000, claimed that "Arguably, the Direct Action Network was likely influenced to some degree by _The Fifth Sacred Thing_ in their spirited oppositional stance, and their choice of nonviolent direct action tactics that mirror those from the book. Even ongoing activist controversies over strategic violence and property destruction appear as part of the novel’s plot as they did in the streets of Seattle. Furthermore, Starhawk, herself an anarchist, was a participant in both the Battle of Seattle and the subsequent A16 action against the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund in D.C., and has written about that experience in the anarchist press. Yet no one so far seems to have publicly connected the ideas in her book to these events. Whether or not the book was a harbinger for the Seattle events to come, it certainly offers food for thought to those who take the potential transformative power of the utopian vision seriously.

_City of Refuge_ is a very  effective sequel, funded via Kickstarter. Its publication was announced on  Facebook's Anarchism and Science Fiction Forum, and Anarchist Solarpunks.  Recommended by <a href="https://godsandradicals.org/2016/12/03/models-for-resistance/">Yvonne  Aburrow</a> as a model for resistance in SF.