---
title: "Rocannon's World (1966); The Left Hand of Darkness (1969); The Lathe of Heaven (1971); 'Vaster than Empires and More Slow' (1971); 'The Ones Who Walk away from Omelas' (1973); The Dispossessed. An Ambiguous Utopia (1974); 'The Day before the Revolution' (1974); 'The New Atlantis' (1975); The Word for World is Forest (1972/1976); The Eye of the Heron (1978); The Compass Rose (1982); Always Coming Home (1985); Buffalo Gals and Other Animal Presences (1987); A Fisherman of the Inland Sea (1994); 'Solitude' (1994); Four Ways to Forgiveness (1995); The Telling (2000); The Birthday of the World, and Other Stories (2002); 'Notes from the Inner City' (2006); The Wild Girls plus (2011)"
format: "book"
category: "l"
yearReleased: "2011"
author: "Ursula K. Le Guin"
---

In a 2008 interview Ursula Le Guin stated that she didn't consider herself an anarchist, because "I entirely lack the activist element". But when asked if she minded that a lot of anarchists claimed her, in approximately the same way they claimed Tolstoy, her response was "Of course I don't mind! I am touched and feel unworthy." (strangers, 2008; and republished in Killjoy's _Mythmakers & Lawbreakers. Anarchist writers on fiction_) Asked, in 2011, if she would describe herself as an anarchist (politically), her reply was "Politically, no; I vote, I'm a Democrat. But I find pacificist anarchist thought fascinating, stimulating, endlessly fruitful." (<a href="http://www.amazon.co.uk/reader/1604864036?_encoding=UTF8&amp;query=lovely art#reader_1604864036">'A Lovely Art'</a>, p91) Jamie Heckert, writing in _Fifth Estate_ in 2010, reflected:

"In recent interviews, you suggested that perhaps you don't qualify for the label anarchist because you are middle-class or because what you do isn't activism. I invite you to reconsider. Who needs activism when you have wu wei? And why not be a middle-class anarchist? This is no contradiction in my book—and your own books have never shied away from life's apparent contradictions. They are embraced, queered.

. . . "Whether or not you call yourself an anarchist, you've helped me to deepen my own understanding of what an anarchist can be, can do. Of what I can do. Of who I can become." [<a href="http://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jamie-heckert-queerly-erotic-an-open-love-letter-to-ursula-le-guin">online</a>]

Reviewing Le Guin's science fictional oeuvre as a whole, Max Haiven's exceptionally perceptive 2015 essay (see bibliography) on Le Guin concludes that it exemplifies prefigurative fiction, which "invites us to both imagine, cultivate and critique the dynamic tension between authority and responsibility as it exists in our own hearts, our communities, our struggles and our movements."

_Rocannon's World_ is among the works discussed by Haiven; he find that it "demonstrates many anarchistic themes", among which he includes critical anthropology and a humanism of possibility.

For George Woodcock _The Left Hand of Darkness_ was Le Guin's "strangest and most successful novel". (Woodcock 1976) Jeff Shantz, in his 2011 _Against All Authority. Anarchism and the Literary Imagination_, devotes four pages to this work in his chapter on 'Novel utopias.'

For Oshee Eagleheart in 2010 'Vaster than Empires and More Slow' "accurately and hilariously portrays the interactions within groups of 'crazy' characters who dare to explore the far reaches of the social universe in search of workable ways of living."

_The Dispossessed_ concerns two worlds, one moon to the other, with vastly differing political systems. One of these is 'Odonianism', a form of Taoist anarchist communism. For Le Guin, anarchism "is the most idealist, and to me the most interesting, of all political theories." (Le Guin, 'Introduction' to _The Wind's Twelve Quarters_ (1975)). She was well-versed in the historical anarchist tradition (especially Kropotkin, the Goodman brothers, and Bookchin), and this shows. The utopia itself is 'ambiguous' because flawed and mutable. The novel succeeds in presenting the most believable, and perhaps the best, exploration of anarchism in a science fiction context, of any yet written. For John P. Clark, "what is most notable about the work is the protagonist's ruthlessly anarchistic critique of Annares itself. It is, in effect, an anarchist critique of anarchism and a utopian critique of the dangers of utopia." (Clark 2009: 22) Uri Gordon describes it as "perhaps the most honest attempt at portraying a functioning anarchist society". (Gordon 2009: 267) The novel won the Libertarian Futurist Society Hall of Fame Award in 1993. For Paul J. Comeau, in 2010, "The novel is one of the best, if not the best, fictional realization of an anarchist society as it might be practiced, and remains one of the most influential modern utopian novels written." In the 2010 online <a href="http://www.anarchistsurvey.com/results/">Anarchist Survey</a>, when asked "What is your favourite anarchist book?", of single books _The Dispossessed_ received the third highest number of hits, only surpassed by two works by Peter Kropotkin.

The anonymous reviewer in <a href="http://www.afed.org.uk/org/org81.pdf">_Organise!_</a> magazine in 2013 concluded that

"Like the anarchist ideals the book so deftly explores, the story itself does not leave us with an ending so much as a staging point for our own journey. To use the ideas of the books, it comes to you like a beggar man, relying on you for all that it requires and leaving you enriched by realising you would be better with nothing but what you carry as long as all needs are met. By the end of reading it I was stood at the wall between two worlds with the choice over whether I help to dismantle it, and by choosing to do so build a greater whole."

Jeff Shantz, in his chapter on 'Novel utopias,' cited above, devotes a further two pages to _The Dispossessed_, which for him is Le Guin's "most appreciated and influential work," in which she "brings to life key aspects of recent anarchist thought. These include bioregionalism, horizontalism, and federation." James Gifford, in 'Literature and Anarchism,' his 2019 contribution to _The Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism_, describes _The Dispossessed_ as the "most recognised anarchist popular fiction."

The influence of this novel hasn't always been welcomed: Ken Macleod said of it, in his 2002 <a href="http://media.wix.com/ugd/f0c74f_a5e27cce5f504aaea74c0c7f38946ff6.pdf"> article</a> on 'Anarchism and Science Fiction', that it "has probably put more people off Anarchism than any other." Bob Black concurs with Michael Moorcock's view that the book is "dull and journalistic" (Black 2015). He continues: "There is little indication that Le Guin is very familiar with anarchist or utopian literature. Contrary to legend, Le Guin is no anarchist. If she is, then where has she been, politically [. . .] for the last forty years? Writing stories and making money." Noting that in 2015 she wrote an introduction to a collection of some of Bookchin's old essays (_The Next Revolution_), he finds further cause in this for attacking her:

"Le Guin now claims that Bookchin's "Post-Scarcity Anarchism" inspired _The Dispossessed_. That's ridiculous, since her "ambiguous utopia" Anarres is scarcity anarchism, not post-scarcity anarchism, and even its anarchism is compromised. If Bookchin inspired Le Guin, her inspiration was based on a misunderstanding. Taking her at her own word, she concealed her debt to Bookchin (and undoubtedly concealed it from Bookchin himself) until long after she had collected her Hugo and Nebula awards [. . .]." (Black 2015: 227–228)

According to Neil Easterbrook (p588) both _The Dispossessed_ and _The Left Hand of Darkness_ were frequently cited by Occupy Wall Street organizers and websites and, with Le Guin's approval, some marchers at Occupy Oakland carried placards depicting the cover of _The Dispossessed_. (<a href="http://www.themillions.com/2013/01/getting-away-with-murder-the-millions-interviews-ursula-k-le-guin.html">The Millions</a>) David Graeber wrote, in his 2009 _Direct Action_ (p219), that:

"One of the main forms for the dissemination of anarchist ideas in America have been feminist science fiction novels: from Ursula LeGuin's _The Dispossessed_ (1974) to Starhawk's _The Fifth Sacred Thing_ (1993). They operate in a similar way. They are crystallizations of certain tendencies of thought, extrapolations from certain forms of practice, experiments in utopian imagining. The main difference is that since the visions developed in novels are not claiming to be anything but fiction, those who enjoy reading (or writing) them do not tend to claim alternative visions are wrong."

Peter Seyferth's 2009 'Anarchism and utopia' notes that the society of Anarres "clearly resembles ideas from Peter Kropotkin's _Mutual Aid_, and _Fields, Factories and Workshops_ and Paul Goodman's _Communitas_." (Randall Amster et al. _Contemporary Anarchist Studies_: 286)

There is a three-page discussion of The Dispossessed by Laurence Davis in the 2019 _Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism_.

A study guide to _The Dispossessed_ is available <a href="http://www.wsu.edu/~brians/science_fiction/dispossessed.html">online</a>; see also <a href="http://faculty.vassar.edu/stillman/docs/Le%20Guin%20bk%20(as%20pub).1.pdf"> The New Utopian Politics of Ursula K. Le Guin's The Dispossessed</a>. Kim Stanley Robinson has an excellent chapter on the novel, in Ida Yoshinaga, Sean Guynes, and Gerry Canavan, eds: _Uneven Futures. Strategies for Community Survival from Speculative Fiction_ (MIT Press, 2022); he not only analyses the work with his customary clarity, he also shows genuine understanding of what anarchism is, or tries to be. See also Taylor Andrew Loy's thesis on <a href="https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/taylor-andrew-loy-anarchy-in-critical-dystopias-an-anatomy-of-rebellion">Anarchy in Critical Dystopias</a> and the 2024 Shotwell <a href="https://www.sav.sk/journals/uploads/12161230WLS_4_2024_Shotwell.pdf">paper</a> referred to below. The novel also merits a page in Branson's 2022 _Practical Anarchism_.

2024 marked the 50th anniversary of the publication of _The Dispossessed_, and _Black Flag Anarchist Review_ marked the occasion with a long and well-considered <a href="https://www.anarchistfaq.org/blackflag/BlackFlag-vol4-no3.pdf">article</a> by Iain McKay, an updated version of an earlier article written for _Anarcho-Syndicalist Review_ 73 in 2018 following her death. For McKay the novel is "still by far the best account of an anarchist society, warts and all." He says "Le Guin, in short, produced a very astute book on anarchism, one aware of the problems and also aware that anarchists had predicted said problems
and shown means of solving them. It is a classic – and I gain something new every time I read it."

For sf novelist Gautam Bhatia in 2024 _The Dispossessed_ is "the original anarchist SF novel". (Appendix to _The Sentence_: 360)

'The Day before the Revolution' tells of Laia Odo herself, the founder of Odonianism. Odo is also one of 'The Ones Who Walk away from Omelas', refusing to benefit from a system in which some gain at the expense of another. Andy Sunfrog, in 2010, concluded: "Thinking of Laia Odo and Ursula K. Le Guin in our day, at the dawn of yet another decade, the day after many past revolutions and the day before many future ones, let's be like the anarchists of these stories, always seeking and questioning, never owning much more than our ideals and practicing them the day before, the day after, and most of all, today." For <a href="https://crimethinc.com/2018/01/25/we-will-remember-freedom-why-it-matters-that-ursula-k-le-guin-was-an-anarchist"> Margaret Killjoy</a> it is "exactly the kind of story that can change the world." Carissa Honeywell, in her 2021 _Anarchism_, borrows the name of Le Guin's story for her first chapter, and indeed discussed the story directly. Noting that it isn't really "a metaphor for anarchism as such," so much as a thought experiment, which "expresses something of the anarchist agenda to reveal what they see as the dark roots, the secrets, and the hidden dominations of unequal social and political structures that appear democratic and just." Graeber and Wengrow's 2021 _The Dawn of Everything_ has a paragraph on the story.

Josh Gosicak, writing in _Fifth Estate_ in 2010, reflected on _The Lathe of Heaven_ as a prescient "post-neoliberal parable", a "potent and unforgiving critique" of both liberalism and neoliberalism. <a href="http://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/lewis-call-postmodern-anarchism-in-the-novels-of-ursula-k-le-guin"> Lewis Call</a>, in 2007, saw the novel as "creating the possibility of an ontological anarchy" and "a major contribution to postmodern anarchism", creating "the possibility of an anarchism that will be highly spiritual, deeply personal and yet also intimately engaged with the world." For Jesse Cohn this "technocratic nightmare" is "an authentically anarchist anti-utopia" (p. 158). This work had also been sympathetically treated by George Woodcock in 1976. _Lathe_ is considered by <a href="https://www.sav.sk/journals/uploads/12161230WLS_4_2024_Shotwell.pdf">Shotwell</a> in parallel with _The Dispossessed_.

For Eagleheart, in the same issue of _Fifth Estate_, "_The Word for World is Forest_ articulated the indigenous worldview of the interdependence of humans and "nature" in a way that I could immediately grok." _Fifth Estate_ #382 was a special issue, "a Tribute to the Radical Imagination of Ursula K. Le Guin", in honour of her 80th birthday.

_The Eye of the Heron_ concerns "a society of pacifists inspired by the life and writings of Gandhi." (Comeau) Jeff Shantz, in his 2011 _Against All Authority_, sees this novel as a development of _The Dispossessed_, focussing on "non-violence and themes of exile or escape within the context of libertarian politics." His paragraph concludes that "It is something of a petit bourgeois utopia."

_The Compass Rose_ was favourably reviewed in _Freedom_ (Murtagh 183). Of the included story 'The New Atlantis' the _Open Road_ writers wrote that Le Guin's character "knows his Bookchin". (Lessa, Takver & Alyx. 1978)

In _Always Coming Home_ the Kesh, a far-flung future people, are, in their absence of formal hierarchy, "fundamentally anarchistic"; "LeGuin offers a significant challenge to the outrageous (yet all too common) claim that capitalism represents the unalterable destiny of humanity" (Call, 2002). Contrasted with the aggressive Condor people who live in the mountains, the two peoples "present vividly aspects of how the world is and how it could be." (Peter Marshall, 1992/2008). Admirable as Le Guin generally was, this work—heavily influenced by romantic views of Native American culture—comes across as earnest but perhaps a little self-indulgent. She herself described it in 2010 as "more deeply anarchist than _The Dispossessed_. [. . .] it's more subversive than the other one." [<a href="http://www.vimeo.com/9010456">Le Guin</a>] Eagleheart found _Always Coming Home_ "still the most complete and believable vision I've found of a practical, possible, sustainable culture." Peter Seyferth, in his 2009 'Anarchism and Utopia,' declared it to be "a utopian masterpiece that is far more demanding and sophisticated than _The Dispossessed_." For John P. Clark this work is Le Guin's "masterpiece and, indeed, what is perhaps the masterpiece of utopian literature to date"; he had <a href="https://www.fifthestate.org/archive/373-fall-2006/books-that-changed-our-lives/">earlier</a> (2006) gone even further, calling it "the greatest work of utopian fiction ever written." Clark expanded on his love for this novel in an article in the Fall 2021 _Fifth Estate_. Javier Sethness, in a 2021 online <a href="https://intlibecosoc.wordpress.com/2021/10/11/critical-theory-in-ursula-le-guins-always-coming-home/">essay</a>, concludes that "Ursula Le Guin’s 'ambiguously' utopian anarchist masterpiece, _Always Coming Home_, is not only a classic of visionary fiction, but also an allegorical exploration of how we might salvage the future, within the context of catastrophic global warming."

_Buffalo Gals and Other Animal Presences_ was noted by a contributor to the old anarchysf mailing as including some stories that "deal with the spiritual matter of re-connecting to the earth." In 2010 Eagleheart wrote in _Fifth Estate_ that "_Buffalo Gals_ has been another of my favorite places to go for reminders of my Deep Ecological awareness, my ecological identity."

For the anonymous author of '<a href="http://www.afed.org.uk/org/org81.pdf">Beyond Perfection</a>', 'Solitude' is "a strange, sad, beautiful story that consistently challenges gut responses and judgements on the nature of power and community. I highly recommend giving it a read, not as a model for an anarchist society but as a challenge to some of our ideas on interpersonal relationships and social duty."

_The Telling_ is Le Guin's first Hainish novel after _The Dispossessed_. It is a further presentation of her anti-authoritarian and anti-fundamentalist views, not explicitly anarchist, but more credible than _Always Coming Home_, perhaps not least by drawing on her lead character's Terran upbringing. <a href="http://imaginaurium.com/anarres/2015/09/03/political-explosions-versus-moral-harmony-can-anarchists-imagine-another-sort-of-liberated-radical/"> Christian Mattheis</a>, at the Anarres Project is prompted by short extracts from this novel to muse on binaries and dichotomies for the liberated radical. Alexis Shotwell, in a <a href="https://www.sav.sk/journals/uploads/12161230WLS_4_2024_Shotwell.pdf">paper</a> promoted on the Anarchist Studies Network Facebook page, observes that _The Telling_ is "both a meditation on the power of collective memory and explicitly a critique of Mao's Cultural Revolution, especially with attention to its suppression of Taoism."

_Four Ways to Forgiveness_ was recommended by <a href="http://nwsfsnews.blogspot.com/2009/10/i-wanna-read-sf-anarchy.html"> Common Action</a> at the panel "Beyond The Dispossessed: Anarchism and Science Fiction" at the Seattle Anarchist Bookfair in October 2009; it had also been recommended by a poster to the anarchysf mailing list, in 2000. It's also included in the Swindon Anarchist Group's list of <a href="http://swindonanarchistgroup.wordpress.com/2009/01/08/anarchistresistance-novels/"> Anarchist/Resistance Novels</a>. Heckert and Cleminson's _Anarchism and Sexuality_ has an entire chapter by Laurence Davis, on 'Love and Revolution in Ursula Le Guin's _Four Ways to Forgiveness_', which he sees as undeservedly neglected, and in which he seeks to "draw out its anarchist dimensions and consider some of its political implications for our contemporary world."

The short stories in the two late collections, _A Fisherman of the Inland Sea_ and _The Birthday of the World, and Other Stories_, are discussed at some length by Max <a href="biblio.htm#Haiven">Haiven</a>. He says:

"While these stories do not explicitly address anarchism or even touch on obviously anarchist themes, it is my argument that they are possessed of a distinctly anarchistic tenor and that they stand as anarchist interventions. This, to the extent that they offer sites of reflection, provocation and meditation for anarchists and non-anarchists alike that challenge us to think and rethink resistance, gender, relationships, ideas and, perhaps most importantly, authority."

<a href="http://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/jamie-heckert-queerly-erotic-an-open-love-letter-to-ursula-le-guin"> Heckert</a> notes _The Birthday of the World, and Other Stories_, for its "tales of love and resistance in a bisexual polyamorous culture". One of the stories, 'Coming of Age in Karhide', is included in the Think Galactic <a href="http://thinkgalactic.org/reading-lists/by-author/">reading list</a>. Le Guin's poem 'Notes from the Inner City' was first published in _Fifth Estate_ #373 in Fall 2006. Laurence Davis, in the book already cited, notes that the story 'Old Music and the Slave Women', which appears in _The Birthday of the World_, is actually a fifth contribution to _Four Ways to Forgiveness_; he describes it as "perhaps motivated in part by Le Guin's indignation at the presumption, especially common in science fiction, that slaves who do not revolt against their oppressors are either contemptible or of no consequence."

_Freedom_'s 2018 obituary describes Le Guin as "One of the most influential writers of her generation, author of possibly the most famous anarchist science fiction ever penned [. . .]", whose writing, from the 70s onward, "remained a lodestone for anarchist authors worldwide."
