---
format: "book"
yearReleased: "2021"
category: "b"
title: "The Girl in the Road (2014); The Actual Star (2021)"
author: "Monica Byrne"
---
_The Girl in the Road_ is a science fiction story dividing its time between Africa and India and heavily inspired by Ursula Le Guin, _The Girl in the Road_ interpolates the issues of religion, climate, gender, and personal sovereignty over our sexuality. It takes place in the near future and introduces many questions which concern our present. Its two stories are split between a coming of age story amidst a society in conflict and upheaval (in Africa) and a rich, relatively stable society undergoing the slow creep of techno-oppression (India). While anarchism is not explicitly discussed, its emphasis on the inequality of climate change but also its potential to remake the world, the dangerous use of technology in the hands of the state apparatus, gender roles and our resistance to them, and the overall importance of personal resistance to the norm is of much interest to anarchist ideologues or those interested in the ideology.

_The Actual Star_ is three braided stories, set in 1012, 2012, and 3012, in Belize, all richly imagined. The future narrative has the most anarchist interest in political terms (although there's plenty of other interest around relationships and gender), as by that date nation states are long gone, and the world is essentially a dynamic utopia: early in the novel one character says "Our world is a pacifist, nomadic, subsidiarist, anarchist gift economy that evolved in response to rapid, catastrophic climate change." In the glossary at the end it says "The global system of nomadic, subsidiarist, anarchist self-organization in 3012, formalized by climate refugees in the late twenty-third century [. . . is] characterized by mutual aid, gift economy, panoptic justice, gender concórdia, documented anarchy, and algorithmic skillmatching." The glossary further defines 'documented anarchy' as "A method of community organization wherein all individuals' actions are recorded and accessible via a blockchain ledger, including the act of accessing such information", a concept derived with acknowledgment from Kim Stanley Robinson's _Red Moon_. The novel as a whole, however, is not necessarily utopian, and more on these political and economic aspects would have been welcome. For this reader the novel's religiosity, though central to the narrative, is oppressive.

