---
category: "b"
author: "Octavia E. Butler"
format: "book"
title: "Patternmaster (1976); Kindred (1979); Lilith's Brood (1987–1989, aka Xenogenesis; consisting of Dawn (1987), Adulthood Rites (1988), and Imago (1989)); Parable of the Sower(1994); Parable of the Talents (1999); Fledgling"
yearReleased: "(2005)"
---
Patternmaster is one of the weakest of Butler's novels, but is nevertheless included in Mark Bould's Red Planets reading list, and is in Dukan'sbibliography as an early work from the first generation of Black Futurists.
 
Kindred is probably Butler's best-known work, and is by now pretty much a standard text, featuring a complex critique of race and power relationships in the ante-bellum South, from the viewpoint of an African-American woman from 1976, who is intermittently pulled back to 1815 whenever her slave-owning white forebear is in danger.
 
For Anu Bonobo, in Fifth Estate #373,
 
Dawn's most daring maneuver was not the unattractive aliens on the breathing bio-ship that rescued the xenophobic humans after a human holocaust—nor even the seemingly benevolent freaks' rejection of humanity's apparently inherent hierarchies; rather, Butler busted boundaries with bizarre, kinky, and blissfully psychedelic interspecies sex. Even though the humans cannot help but like it, do they really want it? As one might imagine, the issue of permission is problematic here; do the humans choose to breed with their apparently terrifying and tentacled saviors and captors? Is this patronizing servitude masked as emancipation?
The Xenogenesis stories have also been recommended on the FacebookAnarchism and Science Fiction Forum.
 
The two Parable books chart the rise of a movement based on mutual aid (or just common human decency) amid the breakdown of society in the United States. Warm and literate, it's unfortunate that the author chose to hang her principles on a new religion.
 
Butler's work, and especially the Parablenovels, were featured in articles in her memory, by Anu Bonobo and Benjamin Carson, in Fifth Estate in 2006. While Bonobo focuses on her Afrofuturism, Carson, while relishing the mutual aid depicted, finds Butler's orientation towards a future in space "deeply troubling".
 
Bonobo, in Fifth Estate #373, speaks of the vampire collectives of Fledgling as "bloodlinked free love communes—of a sort. But since the symbionts need the vampire kiss like a junky needs his needle, it’s difficult to define this as a liberated relationship." Fledgling is included in the Think Galacticreading list as well as the Swindon Anarchist Group's list ofanarchist/resistance novels.
 