---
category: "b"
author: "J.G. Ballard"
format: "book"
title: "The Wind from Nowhere (1962); The Drowned World (1962); The Drought (1965); The Crystal World (1966); The Atrocity Exhibition (1970); Crash (1973); Millennium People"
yearReleased: "(2003)"
---
Ballard's first four novels centre on elemental disasters and, with the exception of the first, successfully transcend the run-of-the-mill. For Vittorio Curtoni, Ballard, "inspired by pictorial surrealism, preached the investigation of 'inner space, i.e. of those connections at the unconscious level which revealed the mechanisms of the human psyche, and translated the idea in a series of brilliant novels [ . . . ] and stories" (25); he only named these four. Forone poster to Facebook's Anarchists and Science Fiction page, "The Drowned Worldperfectly matches many contemporary ideas regarding what the world might be like after decades of climate change."
 
Michael Moorcock's 1978 article in the Cienfuegos Press Anarchist Review singles out The Atrocity Exhibition and Crash forinclusion among books which in his view promote libertarian ideas. He comments that they have "brought criticisms of'nihilism' against him" (43). Both works are innovatory in sf, and have an impersonal and amoral quality which perhapsgives rise to such criticisms. They are libertarian in the sense of challenging orthodoxy, of iconoclasm.Crash is described as "seminal" in a 2013editorial in the Occupied Times.
 
ForRicardo Feral, The Drought, and The Atrocity Exhibition provide "a haunting, introspective alternative to the the mainstream media vision of society."
 
Millennium People features a very British rebellion by the jaded middle class. Darkly humorous, it's included in the Swindon Anarchist Group's list ofAnarchist/Resistance Novels.