---
title: "Slan (1946); null-A series (1948–1985); The Weapon Shops of Isher (1951); The Weapon Makers (1952); The Anarchistic Colossus (1977)"
format: "book"
category: "v"
yearReleased: "1977"
author: "A.E. Van Vogt"
---
_Slan_'s "political message still rings  loud and clear." . . . "entertaining as hell, and it leaves a philosophic  aftertaste that lingers pleasantly." (<a href="http://wconger.liberty.me/2014/08/10/top-10-sci-fi-liberty-novels-you-probably-havent-read/">Conger</a>)

The  null-A series is included in Killjoy's list of stories (see _Mythmakers & Lawbreakers_ in bibliography) that explore  anarchist societies.

_The Weapon Shops of Isher_ won the  Libertarian Futurist Society Hall of Fame Award in 2005. This, and _The Weapon Makers_, are included in Art for Liberty's '<a href="https://www.artforliberty.com/libertarian-fiction/">Libertarian Sci-Fi and Fantasy</a>.'

In _The Anarchistic Colossus_ a future Earth operates as a mixed anarchy controlled by computers; aliens perceive the conquest of Earth as the payoff to a wargame. The anarchist Earth society is an extraordinary hybrid of socialist, capitalist, and bohemian variants of anarchism; it had apparently been instigated by the rightists, who still control two thirds of the economy. 'Techs' had contributed the elimination of crime: sensors detect violent intent before the event, and intercept the attacker (all other actions are free from control). The 'Caps' and the 'Coops' are apparently able to work together, e.g. in fire-fighting (c. 17); they collaborate on universal military training, so that everyone has a basic understanding of  "the ethics of an anarchistic state of war"—indeed "Anarchistic space warcraft" are programmed with anarchist war ethics (c. 31).  Van Vogt even offers the most original solution yet to the problem of work:  idlers are offered welfare food based on insect protein, whereupon most prefer  to work.

Van Vogt in this work finds anarchism all-pervasive: it is not only the norm in Earth society, the human brain itself is a "colossal anarchistic complexity" (c . 35), and at the other end of the scale "The universe itself is in a colossal anarchistic condition" (c . 27). Typically Van Vogtian, this is one of the most bizarre visions of anarchism in all sf.

'John Andrews' article 'A.E. Van Vogt and the Sanity of Anarchy' may be found on the Internet <a href="http://vanvogt.www4.mmedia.is/anarchy.htm">here</a>'. (Dan Clore)
