---
title: "The Angel of the Revolution: A Tale of the Coming Terror (1893); Olga Romanoff; or, The Syren of the Skies (1894); The Outlaws of the Air (1895)"
format: "book"
category: "g"
yearReleased: "1895"
author: "George Griffith"
---
"In _Angel of the Revolution_ an anarchist invents the airplane and puts this at the disposal of Terrorists. They bomb the existing governments out of existence, and maintain the world's new socialist-anarchist society by coming out of hiding in Aëria, their African stronghold." (Dan Clore)  For Michael Moorcock "Even the aerial anarchists of _The Angel of the  Revolution_ by George Griffiths have something to be said for them, for all  their inherent authoritarianism, but they are essentially romantic 'outlaws' and  the views they express are not sophisticated even by the standards of the  1890s." (Moorcock 1978) In fact Moorcock's memory is not doing anarchism any  service here, since in this novel Griffith consistently describes his villains  as 'Terrorists', only mentioning 'Anarchists' in passing in chapter V, as one of  a number of groups unwittingly manipulated by the Terrorists' secret society. Franklin Rosemont has a paragraph on this work in his 2012 'A Bomb-Toting, Long-Haired, Wild-Eyed Fiend: the Image of the Anarchist in Popular Culture', noting that "It is of interest because it builds on the suspicion [ . . . ] that the Red Conspiracy is in fact vastly larger and more inclusive than most people have been willing to admit" (_Surrealism, Bugs Bunny, and the Blues_ (2025), p74).

"In the sequel, _Olga Romanoff_, . . . which takes place in 2030, a hundred years after the events of the preceding novel, the descendant of the last Tsar manages to discover the secret behind advanced technology like airplanes and submarines. Just as she has nearly attained world domination, the Aërians receive news from Mars that a comet is about to strike earth. They go into hiding underground, and return to rebuild their anarchist society after the comet wipes out all life on the surface." (Dan Clore)

_The Outlaws of the Air_ is Griffith's principal diatribe against anarchism, apparently written shortly after the assassination of Sadi Carnot, to which it repeatedly refers. The plot is predictable: anarchists—members of the  "sanguinary brotherhood of the knife and the bomb" (Tower edn: 4)  gain control of revolutionary new airships and proceed to terrorise the world, until finally defeated by their own treachery. All the usual targets are bombed in London, with Scotland Yard being singled out for the first field trials of the new explosive anarchite. The anarchists, as so often in this sort of fiction, don't really even live up to their own principles, being  "really under the direction of a governing Group" (294). The body of the book is curiously bracketed by a sub-plot set in a south Pacific island utopia. Griffith seems to admire the Utopian society for doing away with government and politics, but doesn't seem to notice the irony this produces, given his hatred of the  "horrible creed" (214) of anarchism.
 
