---
title: "The Last of the Masters' (1954); Solar Lottery (1955); Eye in the Sky (1957); Galactic Pot-Healer (1959); Time Out of Joint (1959); The Man in the High Castle (1962); Clans of the Alphane Moon (1964); The Penultimate Truth (1964); The Simulacra (1964); The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (1965); The Crack in Space (1966); Counter-Clock World (1967); The Zap Gun (1967); Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? (1968); Ubik (1969); 'The Electric Ant (1969); Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said (1974); A Scanner Darkly (1977); Valis (1981)"
format: "book"
category: "d"
yearReleased: "1981"
author: "Philip K. Dick"
---
In 'The Last of the Masters' Dick took anarchism itself for its explicit theme. Two hundred years after the triumph of the Anarchist League by overthrowing the world's governments, a pocket state is discovered, ruled by a still-surviving government robot. An Anarchist League agent destroys the robot. The League itself is a voluntary club of unorganised individuals whose task it is to patrol the world scotching any attempts to restore government. It is made clear at the end of the story that, while there are disadvantages to global anarchism, they are more than outweighed by the effective abolition of war that has followed from its adoption. The tale is included in Dana's *[AnarchoSF V.*1](file:///C:\7%20Website\anarchysf\d.htm#Dana)*. *For [Margaret Killjoy](http://www.anarchogeekreview.com/books/the-last-of-the-masters-by-philip-k-dick) "This story, by my reading, is neither libel nor advocacy, just a thought experiment by someone only peripherally versed in anarchism. Which frankly doesn’t make it feel all that valuable to the conversation."

Dick's works constituted for Vittorio Curtoni a "violent fresco of social schizophrenia" (25). All his works show a high degree of humanity and identification with the underdog.

The three novels of the 1950s are referred to by Curtoni as exemplary of his style and concerns. *Solar Lottery* is Dick's first, in which the top political position is chosen by lot, but subject to popularly condoned assassination; a parallel plot concerns a quasi-religious quest outside the solar system. The novel was described in [Marzia Rubega](http://www.arivista.org/index.php?nr=228&pag=228_10.htm&key=solar%20lottery)'s 1996 article on Dick in *A-Rivista Anarchica*, and is cited in *The BASTARD Chronicles 2015.* In *Eye in the Sky* an accident in a particle accelerator causes a number of individuals to live successively through each other's versions of the normal world, none of which is particularly normal. In *Time Out of Joint* the central character believes he is living in the 1950s, as a competition expert; in reality he is living in the 1990s, helping plan the bombing of the moon; his fantasy is a withdrawal psychosis, the only way he can continue this work, having been converted to the 'lunatic' cause.

'The Minority Report' is seen as the unavoidable comparison, in _Freedom_'s 2025 '<a href="https://freedomnews.org.uk/2025/04/11/how-the-uk-is-shaping-a-future-of-precrime-and-dissent-management/">How 
the UK is shaping a future of Precrime and dissent management</a>.'

The society of *Galactic Pot-Healer* has been described as "the ultimate Communist denial of personal consciousness." ([Riggenbach](http://mises.org/daily/5089))

_The Man in the High Castle_, _Ubik_, and _Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said_, among Dick's best, are listed in Curtoni's essential bibliography, but not discussed by him. *The Man in the High Castle* is a complex alternate history of America after losing World War II, set in the Japanese Pacific States of America; it is a superb SF classic, high on compassion and having much to say, indirectly, about power relationships. *Ubik* recounts the involuted existences of a group of people living in 'half-life' after being killed by a bomb on the moon; in many ways similar to *Eye in the Sky*, it has perhaps been overrated, though [Rubega](http://www.arivista.org/index.php?nr=228&pag=228_10.htm&key=solar%20lottery) describes it as both "fascinating" and a "masterpiece". Reality is out of joint for the protagonist of *Flow My Tears*, who finds himself briefly living in an alternate world created by another character's drug trip; the figure of Police General Buckman, although disagreeable, is presented as human—there are no human baddies, for such antagonist as may be discerned is the abstract one of drugs-as-control. For [Evan Lampe](http://tashqueedagg.wordpress.com/2013/05/02/philip-k-dick-flow-my-tears-the-policeman-said-1974-class-and-the-police-state/) "The novel is incredibly powerful and in my view his greatest work." The book was also the topic for discussion in the fourth anarchySF <a href="https://anchor.fm/anarchysf/episodes/Flow-My-Tears-the-Policeman-Said--Sex--Drugs-and-Knowledge-ecjvuh">podcast</a>, in April 2020, in which other works, such as A Scanner Darkly, were also referenced.

For Peter Werbe, writing in *Fifth Estate* #390, Fall 2013, Dick's anarchist view appears in many of his novels. By way of example, he singles out *Clans of the Alphane Moon*, which features a planet originally established as psychiatric institution, into which people have divided into caste-like diagnostic groups. Werbe sees this as "Dick's critique of the contemporary world." He sees the 'Pares'—the paranoid clan—as representing politicians and statesmen, while the 'Manses'—those afflicted with mania—as the planet's warriors, these two clans being "the ones which create the chaos, all the while posing themselves as guardians of order." Werbe briefly revisited this novel in _Fifth Estate_ #410, Fall 2021. Evan [Lampe](https://tashqueedagg.wordpress.com/2013/04/12/philip-k-dick-clans-of-the-alphane-moon-1964-we-are-all-mentally-ill-2/), too, sees this novel as Dick's "attempt to prove to the reader that mental illness is in fact integral to how we organize society."

*The Simulacra* "portrays a world in which government is evil, duplicitous, and bent on concealing the truth from the public." ([Riggenbach](http://mises.org/daily/5089)) The novel is cited in *The BASTARD Chronicles 2015*, as is *The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch.*

_The Crack in Space_ is one of Dick's weaker works, but for Evan <a href="https://tashqueedagg.wordpress.com/2013/03/12/philip-k-dick-the-crack-in-space-1966-the-setting/">Lampe</a> it is nevertheless "a warning to us that we cannot simply export or forestall the problems of underemployment, inequality, corporate rule, 
media-controlled politicians, and racism."

In *Counter-Clock World* a black religious leader, round whom much of the book revolves, is referred to throughout as the 'Anarch' Peak; but the reason for this is obscure.

*The Zap Gun* depicts an America divided between those who believe the government is protecting them with ever more elaborate weaponry and those who know that none of the weaponry works, except in simulations; both parties are in on the fraud, which they perpetrate in order to prop up a permanent Cold War economy. ([Riggenbach](http://mises.org/daily/5089))

*Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?*—famously adapted as the film _Blade Runner_—was singled out for mention by Walker Lane, of the *Fifth Estate* collective, for a [Summer 2012 anarchist reading list.](http://www.fifthestate.org/archive/387-summer-2012/anarchist-reading-list-fifth-estate-staff/)

'The Electric Ant' is the subject of a one-page discussion in Jesse Cohn's 2024 _Hot Equations_.

In *The Penultimate Truth* members of the elite program an android politician which/who keeps the underground masses properly stirred up and misinformed. ([Riggenbach](http://mises.org/daily/5089)) For [Lampe](http://tashqueedagg.wordpress.com/2013/04/22/615/) a clear moral is that "It does not matter if power if justifiable on some level. It is nonetheless, sociopathic."

A proponent of governmental decentralisation and opponent of organised religion, it is perhaps unfortunate that some of Dick's later, delusional, work has had a posthumous influence in the emergence of anarcho-gnostics. Among these later works is *Valis*, briefly mentioned in a quotation in *The BASTARD Chronicles 2015*, which also quotes from _Radio Free Albemuth_.

Lampe has individual [blog](http://tashqueedagg.wordpress.com/index/) entries for each of 30 Dick novels, including one not sf.
