---
category: "d"
author: "Christopher Nolan"
format: "film"
title: "The Dark Knight"
yearReleased: "2008"
---
Bruce Wayne/Batman, Lieutenant James Gordon and 		enthusiastic new District Attorney Harvey Dent seek to eliminate 		organized crime in Gotham City, but the sociopathic Joker carries out a 		dastardly scheme to turn Dent into a villain and Batman into a public 		enemy. According to		SFE, this 		film is "Widely regarded as the finest Superhero film ever made".
 
David Graeber has		written 		interestingly on the Batman trilogy (with a longer version 		published as 'On Batman and the Problem of Constituent Power', in		Graeber 2015). This film, and Batman 		Begins, he says "had moments of genuine eloquence",
 
But even that movie begins to fall flat the moment 		it touches on popular politics. The end, when Bruce and Commissioner 		Gordon settle on the plan to scapegoat Batman and create a false myth 		around the martyrdom of Harvey Dent, is nothing short of a confession 		that politics is identical to the art of fiction. The Joker was right: 		redemption lies only in the fact that the violence, the deception, can 		be turned back upon itself.
Further,
 
When Dark Knight came out in 2008, there 		was much discussion over whether the whole thing was really a vast 		metaphor for the war on terror: how far is it okay for the good guys 		(America, obviously) to adapt the bad guy’s methods? The filmmakers 		managed to respond to these issues and still produce a good movie. This 		is because the War on Terror actually was a battle of secret networks 		and manipulative spectacles. It began with a bomb and ended with an 		assassination. One can almost think of it as an attempt, on both sides, 		to actually enact a comic book version of the universe.