---
category: "d"
author: "Cory Doctorow"
format: "book"
title: "Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom (2003); Someone Comes to Town, Someone Leaves Town (2005); Little Brother (2008); Makers (2009); For the Win (2010);  The Great Big Beautiful Tomorrow (2011); Pirate Cinema (2013); Homeland (2013); Walkaway"
yearReleased: "(2017)"
---
The two earlier novels were both recommended byCommon Action at the panel "Beyond The Dispossessed: Anarchism and Science Fiction" at the Seattle Anarchist Bookfair in October 2009.
 
Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom features a post-scarcity future in which money has been replaced by personal reputation ratings, or 'Whuffie'. It was the subject of a retrospective review by Jason Rodgers in the Summer 2018 Fifth Estate.
 
Someone Comes to Town is an unusual fantasy novel, which if it wasn't by Doctorow I would probably not include, though it's well worth a read. Killjoy (Fall 2011) includes it among some examples of books in which anarchists appear as "sympathetic (though often misguided or idealized characters").
 
Little Brother won the 2009 Prometheus Award. A stirring novel for young adults, it features a hackers' fightback against the paranoid surveillance society of the US Department of Homeland Security. Reviewed and commended byandywelshman of the Glasgow Anarchist Federation, for whom "This book is a must read for everyone and should be required reading for everyone under 25, if you read it you’ll find out why."
 
The sequel, Homeland, was published in February 2013, and was joint winner of the 2014 Prometheus award.
 
Makers—described by theauthor as "a book about people who hack hardware, business-models, and living arrangements to discover ways of staying alive and happy even when the economy is falling down the toilet"—isn't one of Doctorow's best, but was nominated for the 2010 Prometheus award. It was suggested by one contributor to reddit as a possible example ofagorist fiction, and is listed at the GoodReadsAnarchist & Radical Book Club.
 
For the Win features an interesting combination of militant international labour activism and the world of online gaming, in which game-workers join the IWWWW (Industrial Workers of the World Wide Web), known as the Webblies, by analogy with the Wobblies (a concept borrowed from Ken Macleod). While some readers have not appreciated the moralising, for me the gaming angle was a bit heavy-going, but it's a YA book, and doubtless this would be fine for its intended readership.
 
ZekeTeflon's 2014 review of the PM Press edition of The Great Big Beautiful Tomorrow plus found the novella disappointingly short, and not quite fulfilling its promising potential.
 
Pirate Cinema won the 2013 Prometheus Award. Another YA novel, it's a rousing subversive attack on attempts to stifle creativity by controlling Internet downloads. One of the protagonists is explicitly anarchist, and works in an anarchist bookshop off Brick Lane, London—named "Dancing Emma's" after Emma Goldman, but the location more than coincidentally close to the Freedom Bookshop in Whitechapel; Doctorow personally contributed to Freedom Bookshop's repair and rebuilding fund after it was firebombed in January 2013.
 
ForRicardo Feral Doctorow's YA novels are "particularly important for introducing the ideas of personal freedom and opposition to State control to younger readers." MargaretKilljoy has said "I've never met a Cory Doctorow book I don't love."
 
Walkaway tells of walking away from work and the dominance of a mega-rich oligarchy, the development of a post-scarcity gift economy, and the near-conquest of death. Described by theauthor as "a utopian novel", with credit given to David Graeber in the acknowledgments, the novel is recommended in theSharp and Pointed review by Zeke Teflon as "quite possibly the best fictional description of a post-scarcity society ever written."
 
In an August 2018interview Doctorow states explicitly that he's not an anarchist, but that he doesn't know what he is.
 