---
category: "d"
author: "Sydney Newman, C.E. Webber, and Donald Wilson"
format: "film"
title: "Doctor Who"
yearReleased: "TV series"
---
The adventures of a time-travelling renegade Time Lord from the planet Gallifrey. According to theScience Fiction Encyclopedia "It is the most successful Space Opera in the history of television, not excluding Star Trek."
 
St John Karp, inThe Anarchist Doctor Who, while a "massive fan" of the show, identifies two contradictions: "One is the Doctor's xenophilia vs. Doctor Who's xenophobia. The other is the Doctor's status as both a rebel against and a symbol of the status quo. El problemo." But also "it's a show about libertarianism; a love of strange things; a love of exploration; a love of eccentricity; and the defence of the rights of the individual against the establishment."
 
ForKasimir Urbanski the Doctor is a "libertarian superhero":
 
He hated the stifling bureaucracy of his own people that he ran away in a broken time machine just to be his own person. He has a complete distaste for authority, particularly corrupt government and warmongering military. He’s always ready to fight anyone who wants to force their will on anyone else.
And he’s pretty much always been that way.
Most importantly, he's always been about the power of the Individual—not the ideals of some Federation, or even specifically about things like justice, fairness or even good. But more than anything, about the power that any one person has, as themselves, to change the world.
A contributor to libcom.org's forum onScience fiction and fantasy with anarchist themes noted that a 2005 episode called 'The Long Game' included "an undercover Anarchist posing as a journalist from a group called 'Freedom 15' 200,000 years into the future on a space station above Earth." "My impression was that while the episode did not go into any depth into the political philosophy of Anarchism the anarchist was portrayed in a positive anti-straw man like way."
 