---
title: "The Dark Knight Rises"
format: "film"
category: "d"
yearReleased: "2012"
author: "Christopher Nolan"
---
 Set eight years after the previous film, Batman comes out of  retirement to take on the imposing figure of Bane, and save Gotham  City from nuclear destruction; Catwoman is also featured, and Robin  introduced.
  
 David Graeber opens his New Enquiry essay '<a href="http://thenewinquiry.com/essays/super-position/">Super  Position</a>' (with a longer version published as 'On Batman and  the Problem of Constituent Power', in <a href="biblio.htm#Graeber 2015">Graeber 2015</a>) by stating that "The Dark Knight Rises really  is a piece of anti-Occupy propaganda," whilst acknowledging that  Christopher Nolan claims that the script was written before the  movement started, and that the scenes of the occupation of Gotham  were actually inspired by Dickens's account of the French  Revolution. Graeber feels that the film is defeated by its own  ambition, and "stuttered into incoherence."
  
 Reddit's Anarchy 101 has a <a href="https://www.reddit.com/r/Anarchy101/comments/2c9v23/would_bane_from_the_dark_knight_rises_qualify_as/"> page</a> discussing 'Would Bane from the Dark Knight Rises qualify  as an Anarchist?':
 For AutumnLeavesCascade, "That whole film  trilogy contains strong anti-anarchist propaganda, so we ought  not trust its depictions of its "anarchists". Nevertheless, Bane  had a bit of the rhetoric and actions, but ultimately his  character progression was to make the film's point that you  can't trust anti-authoritarian resistance to not become  tyrannical, it's the typical bullshit that anarchy results in a  backswing of warlordism or totalitarianism."   [Deleted] answers the question with:   Not in the slightest bit. Actually I think  the movie itself has a contradiction in it that really says a  lot about the ideological climate we exist in.  Nolan was clearly trying tie Bane to  Occupy (even just via symbols/terminology) and criticize  revolutionary anti-capitalist sentiment in general. The  liberation of the prisons, the comments about the "people's  house", the attacks on cops, all of this is a clear attempt to  place Bane in an ideological camp. But here's where a problem  comes in; just labeling them the bad guys isn't enough for us  not to sympathize with them. Its not enough that all the visual  indicators of bad (freaky breathing apparatus) are there,  there's a legitimate danger that no matter how many heroic shots  of valiant cops there are, there's a chance that the audience  will still cheer for the orphans that didn't get to grow up with  wealth from the arms industry. So to ensure we stay with the "right"  side, they have to insert a plot about the bomb that otherwise  makes no sense at all. Because simply, the defenders of the  status quo really can't be the good guys unless the alternative  to the status quo is annihilation. jamieandhisego concludes the Reddit  discussion with his own two word answer: "Fuck no." 
 Another Reddit <a href="https://www.reddit.com/r/Anarchism/comments/ww7wo/my_anarchist_perspective_of_the_dark_knight_rises/"> discussion</a>, entitled 'My Anarchist Perspective of the Dark  Knight Rises', begins with an original post from mattkips, which  rails against the film for its portrayal of anarchists, but which  misfires because the film never actually identifies anyone as  anarchists. The lengthy discussion it provoked bears a read,  nevertheless.
  
  