---
title: "We (1920), The Dragon and Other Stories (1966)"
format: "book"
category: "z"
yearReleased: "1966"
author: "Yevgeny Zamyatin"
---
A reviewer in the _Cienfuegos Press Anarchist Review_ in 1976 described Zamyatin as  "one of the most important political satirists in modern times. One of the last  thinking writers of any talent that Russia has produced."

_We_, the most original of the anti-utopias, describes a walled-in total-control One State of rationality which stringently excludes the human factor. The central character, D-503, the inventor of the Integral, discovers some atavistic tendencies in himself, wavers towards rebellious elements, but finally undergoes the operation for removal of his fantasy centre, and watches unmoved as his rebel mistress is vaporised. However it's not certain that the wider revolution doesn't finally succeed in overthrowing the state and transporting humanity rather than sterility to the stars via D-503's Integral.

Marie-Louise Berneri drew an optimistic conclusion from the book, in that it shows the weakness of totalitarianism, for  "A thousand years of propaganda have not succeeded in transforming men into perfect machines; an operation on their brain is necessary to carry this out." (Berneri 1950: 316) Colin Ward and George Woodcock, among others, commented on the debts of Huxley and Orwell to Zamyatin, probably considerable in the case of Orwell. P.R. in 1977 described _We_ as "a scathing futuristic satire on the emerging Bolshevik state"; but Zamyatin was imprisoned by the Tsarists before he was imprisoned by the Bolsheviks, and the satire has a wider application (a similar mistake has often been made in respect of Orwell's _Nineteen Eighty-Four_). Woodcock summed up Zamyatin's masterpiece as "the first novel of literary importance to present a relatively complete vision of the negative results of the realization of Utopia." (Woodcock 1966: 170). It won the  Libertarian Futurist Society Hall of Fame Award in 1994. It has been suggested  that _We_ may have been an influence on Ayn Rand's _Anthem_, but the  evidence is circumstantial at best [<a href="https://stpeter.im/writings/rand/zamyatin-rand.html">Saint-Andre</a>].  Notably, Ursula K. Le Guin in 1973 described _We_ as "the best single work  of science fiction yet written" ('The Stalin in the Soul', in her essay  collection _The Language of the Night_ [1979]). The novel is recommended by <a href="https://seesharppress.wordpress.com/2016/01/14/we-by-yevgeney-zemyatin-the-direct-forerunner-of-1984/">Zeke Teflon</a>, for whom it is  "remarkably prescient", and "a great dystopian novel."

Zamyatin's 1966 collection was  reviewed in _Black Flag_ in 1975, and the review was reprinted in  the _Cienfuegos Press Anarchist Review_ in 1977. R.P. described  these stories as "bitter jabs in the face of authority, orthodoxy and  tradition". Of these stories, however, only one—'A Story about the  Most Important Thing' (1927)—is regarded as SF.

From science fiction scholarship, Brett Cooke says that "Zamiatin conveys an anarchist's hostility towards all fixed ideologies." (Gary Westfahl, ed., 2005: _The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy_, Vol. 3, p1338)

Tony Burns, in a 2016 <a href="https://utopian-studies-europe.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/2006.pdf">abstract</a> for the Utopian Studies Society, claims that "Le Guin’s science fiction is heavily indebted to the work of Yevgeny Zamyatin, and especially to Zamyatin's dystopian novel We." In his view, "Both Zamyatin and Le Guin are anarchists. However, in the case of Zamyatin this commitment to anarchism leads to a critique of the idea of utopian speculation, whereas in that of Le Guin it does not. [ . . . ] [T]his is because Zamyatin is committed to a nihilistic type of anarchism which derives ultimately from the writings of Max Stirner and Friedrich Nietzsche, whereas Le Guin is a 'social' anarchist who draws on a different tradition which is usually associated with the writings of Kropotkin. [ . . . ] [A]lthough Le Guin is indeed indebted to Zamyatin, nevertheless she misunderstands Zamyatin's views on ethics and politics."

See also Nick Heath's 2010 <a href="http://afed.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/org74.pdf">review article</a> in _Organise!_

