---
title: "'Constitution for Utopia'"
format: "book"
category: "c"
yearReleased: "1961"
author: "John W. Campbell, Jr"
---
This is a typically  controversial editorial by <em>Analog</em>'s most influential editor.  Characteristically, he says the creation of utopia is "an engineering problem,  and should be approached as such." (5)

Campbell argues that "Since it can be pretty  fairly shown that <em>any</em> form of government—from pure anarchy through  absolute tyranny, with every possible shading in between—will yield Utopia <em>provided the rulers are wise, benevolent, and competent</em>, the place to start  engineering of Utopia is with the method of selecting rulers" (6). This he  suggests should be done by restricting the franchise to the top 20% income  bracket, irrespective of how such income may have been earned, which in  Campbell's view should at least ensure competence, which is really the only  criterion which concerns him.

Anarchism is pretty summarily dismissed:

"Anarchy is government-that-is-no-government. In other  words, each individual citizen is his own ruler. Given that all the citizens are  wise, benevolent, and competent, anarchy will produce a Utopia. Unfortunately,  this requires that each citizen be in fact, not simply in his own  perfectly sincere convictions, actually wise, benevolent and competent."

It is therefore clearly impossible. Campbell spells this  out in a reply to a letter in a subsequent issue (UK edition, Oct 1961): "<em>the  usual trouble is that some individual exercises his right as an Anarchist, to  live the way he wants to by enslaving his neighbours.</em>" (125)
 
