---
title: "Brave New World (1932); After Many a Summer  (1939); Ape and Essence (1948); Island (1962)"
format: "book"
category: "h"
yearReleased: "1962"
author: "Aldous Huxley"
---
Huxley has a significant place at the periphery of anarchism. Influenced to some extent by anarchist thought and experiment, he came in his turn to influence a later generation,  the libertarian counter-culture of the 1960s. Already familiar with Godwin, Tolstoy, Proudhon, and Kropotkin, for Huxley it was the Spanish Civil War which prompted a specific reappraisal of anarchism. In a response to a questionnaire circulated to British writers by the _Left Review_ in summer 1937, in which authors were asked to take sides, he responded:  "My sympathies are, of course, with the Government side, especially with the Anarchists; for Anarchism seems to me much more likely to lead to desirable social change than highly centralized, dictatorial Communism." (Huxley 1969:423). In December Huxley's response was reprinted on the front page of the British anarchist paper  _Spain and the World_ (Huxley 1937-12-10). Emma Goldman responded enthusiastically to Huxley's statement, writing to the latter in early 1938 to thank him:  "Without wishing to be pushing, I cannot refrain from assuring you that this statement of yours is an event in my life of first-rate importance: indeed, I feel that it was worth fighting for fifty years to be able to call one a comrade who is so outstanding as a creative artist and who comes from a family of libertarians." (Porter:309) Albert Meltzer records, however, that when she tried  "to rope him into activity for the Spanish Anarchists", "he ran off like a startled fawn" (Meltzer 1976: 24)  

Subsequent non-fiction works  _Ends and Means_ (1937), _Science, Liberty and Peace_ (1947), _Brave New World Revisited_ (1949), though never directly anarchist, explored collateral issues such as pacifism, decentralisation, the role of science and technology, property distribution, and ecology.  

In the seminal dystopia _Brave New World_ the Savage, who has taught himself classic Western culture, encounters the new world of babies in bottles, soma and sex, is revolted, and is finally driven to suicide. In his 1946 introduction to the work Huxley said that if he were to rewrite it he would include a third option for the Savage: a community of exiles and refugees, in which  "economics would be decentralist and Henry-Georgian, politics Kropotkinesque and cooperative." (Huxley 1946: 8)

Among anarchists, the most enthusiastic discussion of this work came from George Woodcock, for whom it was  "the first warning vision of the kind of mindless, materialistic existence a society dominated by technological centralization might produce" (Woodcock 1975: 458). Of the big three dystopias (with Zamyatin's _We_ and Orwell's _Nineteen Eighty-Four_) it is the weakest and most overrated, although for David Goodway, in his 2005 piece on 'Aldous Huxley and Alex Comfort: A Comparison,' "the brilliant dystopian _Brave New World_ continues to impress" (Klaus & Knight: 111).  

George Woodcock linked _After Many a Summer_ with _Ends and Means_ and _Brave New World Revisited_ as writings in which  "Huxley explicitly accepted the validity of the anarchist critique of the existing society" (Woodcock 1975: 458); and felt that it was through this novel especially that Huxley transmitted the libertarian attitude to the 1960s (Woodcock 1977: 52).  David Goodway sees Huxley (with Lewis Mumford) as one of the forerunners of the  'new anarchism' of the late 20th century, with its emphasis on biology, ecology,  anthropology and alternative technology, in a line through Paul Goodman and Alex  Comfort to Colin Ward and, especially, Murray Bookchin (Goodway: 232). Goodway also has half a page on this novel in his essay comparing Huxley and Alex Comfort, in Klaus and Knight, eds (see bibliography).

_Ape and Essence_ is a post-holocaust dystopia, presented in the form of a film script. For Woodcock it was  "a book which cannot be ignored by the libertarian, for it is one of the most bitter and sincere satirical attacks on the modern state and its centralising tendencies that has been produced in recent years" (Woodcock 1949).

_Island_ is Huxley's utopia, ostensibly an anti-<em>Brave New World</em>, founded on tantric yoga, Buddhist behaviourism, and psychedelic drugs. The economy is cooperative, the political system a federation of self-governing geographical, professional and economic units, and religion centred on individual experience. For Woodcock _Island_ "was the nearest any writer approached to an anarchist Utopia since William Morris wrote  _News from Nowhere_" (Woodcock 1975: 458). For Goodway, too, it was "the  first fully realized libertarian utopia" since Morris's work; for him the  society Huxley presented "is a society in which I personally would be delighted  to live." Very much a novel of the 60s, it is in a broad sense anarchistic, but the formula presented—sex, drugs and religion—is far from liberating, and objectively it is not that distant from _Brave New World_. This is noted by a character in Michel Houellebecq's 1998 novel <em>Atomised </em>(a.k.a. <em>The Elementary Particles)</em>, who says "If you look at it closely, the harmonious society in <em>Island </em>has a lot in common with <em>Brave New World</em>. Huxley was probably senile by that time. He didn't seem to notice the similarities himself. 
The society in <em>Island </em>is as close to <em>Brave New World</em> as hippie liberalism is to bourgeois liberalism—or rather to its Swedish social-democratic variant." This point, in turn, was also picked up by Goodway in his 2006 <em>Anarchist Seeds Beneath the Snow</em>.
  
