---
title: "Everything for Everyone. An Oral History of the New York Commune, 2052–2072"
format: "book"
category: "o"
yearReleased: "2022"
author: "M.E. O'Brien & Eman Abdelhadi"
---
This remarkable novel is structurally unique in sf in being presented as an edited collection of oral history interviews with New Yorkers living in 2072, in which no single story predominates, but collectively the reader learns of the extraordinary societal changes that have taken place in the previous years (i.e. the fifty years since the date of publication). The response to climate change and complete economic and political collapse has been global (apart from an unreconstructed Australia), and radical in the extreme. It has taken place with extraordinary rapidity, and without any utopian consistency, so that in some instances the transition has been far from peaceful. But the world in 2072 is now essentially 'communist', in a vision which is essentially _anarcho_-communist, though the term isn't used. The vision, as well as the history, is well realised, and largely credible.

A very recent publication, the work has already been well received. Juno Jill Richards reviewed it for Blind Field Journal, the review being re-published on the <a href="https://www.anarchistfederation.net/we-took-something-that-was-property-and-made-it-life-on-everything-for-everyone/"> Anarchist Federation</a> website. For Richards, "_Everything for Everyone_ is not a dystopian end of the world, nor even a singularly perfect utopia, but something between. It is a process of making new forms of collective life as the content of revolution, shorn of romance. Indeed, nostalgia is a posture the book pointedly refuses, for the ways that it makes rigid a single version of revolutionary change."

For Phil Kaplan, in his <a href="https://spectrejournal.com/revolution-in-our-lifetime/">Spectre</a> review, _Everything for Everyone_ "provides us with a wonderfully inspiring depiction of the most incredible, audacious, and yet plausible future any of us could hope for." "Every socialist needs to read this book. Every abolitionist, every Marxist, every anarchist, every revolutionary needs to read this book. Every person who has ever wondered how the world will function after the final retirement of the market, the commodity form, money, wages, rent, coercive gender roles, prisons, police, class, nation states, borders, profit, and in general the dominating power of any humans over any others." . . . "[T]his book is a stunningly effective antidote to the recalcitrance that revolutionaries have shown when asked to describe the future we seek to construct." Kaplan concludes:

"In its politics as well as its form as jointly produced and inherently interpersonal, it demands being read, discussed, and critiqued together. We can ask our questions and raise our issues while we still revel in this intense and absolutely lovely presentation of humanity’s future on our planet and beyond. Another world is indeed possible. This short book (239 very fast-turning pages) vividly and believably shows us what it is we can win."

Johanna Isaacson, in _Fifth Estate_ #414, Fall 2023, described _Everything for Everyone_ as "a stunningly ambitious speculative utopian novel". Joseph Mogul, in his 2025 <a href="https://hereandtogether.substack.com/p/anarchism-explored">Anarchism, 
Explored</a>, describes it as "a great resource to imagine a better world, noting that "The world that Abdelhadi and O’Brien build is not utopian; there are tensions and traumas from prior decades, but there is infrastructure in place to wrestle with conflict."

Perhaps this is a premature judgement on my part, but I can't help feeling that this is, for anarchists, the most significant work of sf written since Le Guin's _The Dispossessed_.

