---
title: "Nineteen Eighty-Four"
format: "book"
category: "o"
yearReleased: "1949"
author: "George Orwell"
---
Orwell had considerable knowledge of anarchism and anarchists, most notably from his period as a combatant in the Spanish Civil War, described in his _Homage to Catalonia_ (1938 and 1953), where the anarchists are described very favourably. Though after 1939 he distanced himself from anarchist views (disagreeing with  their wartime pacifism), he became a good friend to anarchists. During and after the Second World War he came into personal contact with the anarchist movement in Britain, mixing with them at Freedom Bookshop and in pubs, and developing friendships with well-known British anarchists of the day,  including Herbert Read, George Woodcock, and Vernon Richards. In 1945, following the conviction of the anarchist publishers of _War Commentary_, Orwell became Vice-Chairman of the Freedom Defence Committee (of which Herbert Read was Chairman), the only occasion on which he accepted office in any organisation. In 1946 he was billed to speak to the London Anarchist Group on Russian foreign  policy (though it's not certain the talk took place); he contributed a book review to _Freedom_, and in 1949 donated a typewriter to Freedom Press, also giving financial support to _NOW_, Woodcock's anarchist publication. That year, while Orwell was  treated in a sanatorium in Gloucestershire, his adoptive son Richard was lodged  at the nearby Tolstoyan anarchist Whiteway Colony, where he attended school. (Bowker:  403) It was said that "At most, George Orwell may be said to have been an  anarchist fellow-traveller; but he was one of the best there ever was." (Walter  2011: 211 [Walter 2011 is the key reference for Orwell and Anarchism]; Goodway: 346-7) In an unexpected tribute, _Class War_'s  Ian Bone has written that "Orwell's kind of pipe-smoking English radicalism was  a greater influence than Bakunin or Kropotkin." (Bone) (See also Laursen, in bibliography) for a recent work of particular  interest.)

George Woodcock recorded in his autobiography (vol. 1: 287) that while writing his best-known work "Orwell outlined to me all the themes that emerged in _Nineteen Eighty-Four_, though, with characteristic secretiveness, he talked little about the details of the novel, and until I saw it in print I had only the sketchiest idea of the plot."

_Nineteen Eighty-Four_ has been seen by some anarchists as a vindication of Bakunin's opposition to the Marxist view of the state (Woodcock 1966: 49). Like most people, anarchists have seen the novel as a masterpiece (Woodcock 1953: 150, P.S. 1983). For Herbert Read it was "the most terrifying warning that a man has ever uttered" (Read 1950: 105). For Woodcock "what gives _1984_ its peculiar force is the way in which it accepts Zamiatin's hints of the continuity between the present and the possible Utopian future, and shows that these may be not merely signs of direction, but actual parts of a new social structure even now forming around us." (Woodcock 1956: 97) Anarchist writing as the year itself approached and passed noted how accurate some of Orwell's prognosis had been, especially how Britain had indeed become no more than Airstrip One, an eastern outpost of the American Empire (PS 1983, Albon 1984).  "The most important insight of _Nineteen Eighty-Four_, which he shared with the anarchists, that the urge to power is more durable and more dangerous than all ideologies, has been abundantly borne out with the decay of ideology in Russia and the increase in the number of regimes in the modern world that depend wholly on naked power." (Woodcock 1984: 20)  The anarchist activist Albert Meltzer, who admittedly only met Orwell once, was  less impressed with his writings: "To be honest, I thought Orwell a lot wittier  than his writings, which I found usually, and at that time always, a dreadful  bore. Such an opinion became literary heresy." (<a href="http://www.spunk.org/library/writers/meltzer/sp001591/angels22.html">Meltzer</a>  1996)

Alex Comfort, who also only met Orwell once, but had had a friendly correspondence with him, reflected interestingly in 1983 that, when he commented to Orwell that he took _Nineteen Eighty-Four_ as a political statement against dictatorship, he was astonished by the author's reply "that it was, but that the model in his mind was also that of the neurotic's internal 'thought police', with Big Brother as the superego. For Comfort, "Americans read _Nineteen Eighty-Four_ as a nightmare based on Stalinism. To some extent it is; but Orwell's novel of Soviet Communism is _Animal Farm_. _Nineteen Eighty-Four_ is rather an extrapolation of the state of Europe, and probably America, if the Project had succeeded", the Project being the liquidation of Bolshevism.  On reaching the year itself, his view was that "_Nineteen Eighty-Four_ has not arrived in 1984, but the danger is postponed, not cancelled, and many of its features are partly in place—nukespeak instead of Newspeak, politics conducted as a manipulated media event. There are some things even Orwell did not foresee; he could have made Big Brother a Christian fundamentalist ayatollah and verisimilitude would not have been strained." ('1939 and 1984: George Orwell and the Vision of Judgment', in _Against Power and Death_)

The book tied for the Libertarian  Futurist Society Hall of Fame Award in 1984.

For <a href="https://greenanarchy.anarchyplanet.org/files/2012/05/greenanarchy17.pdf">A.Morefus</a>, writing in _Green Anarchy_ 17 in 2012, the novel stands as "the all-time classic understanding of techno-fascism."

In July 2024 the work was the subject of an online <a href="https://carneross.substack.com/p/1984-an-anti-capitalist-tract">essay</a> by anarchist Carne Ross.

