---
category: "p"
author: "Marge Piercy"
format: "book"
title: "Dance the Eagle to Sleep  (1970); Woman on the Edge of Time (1976);He, She and It aka Body of Glass"
yearReleased: "(1991)"
---
Dance the Eagle to Sleep tells of an attempt by a group of student revolutionaries to set up a communistic alternative society within an oppressive near future USA. Very much of its period. It was deemed "pretty good" by a contributor to Anarchy 101'sWhat is your favorite anarchist novel? As of September 2018, it's included in Nick Mamatas's Anarchist StoryBundle.
 
Woman on the Edge of Time concerns a woman who is confined in a mental hospital whose only escape is into the future, to what Lessa, Takver andAlyx, in Open Road, call "the future-anarchist village" of Matapoisett. In the novel, Piercy herself doesn't use the term 'anarchist',although there is indeed no government: the closest thing to it are the township and regional planning councils, whichare chosen by lot. However, in herintroduction to the 2016 edition she says: "Like most women’s utopias, the novel is profoundly anarchist and aimed at integrating people back into the natural world and eliminating power relationships." The book was enthusiastically reviewed in Anarchist Feminist Magazine in 1985. It is included in Zeke Teflon'sFavorite Anarchist Science Fiction Novels.
 
He, She and It was recommended byCommon Action at the panel 'Beyond The Dispossessed: Anarchism and Science Fiction', at the Seattle Anarchist Bookfair in October 2009.
 
Of her own politics, Piercy hassaid "I learned a lot from Marxism but probably lean more toward syndicalist anarchism."
 