---
format: "book"
yearReleased: "1993—originally published in three volumes, 1972–1976"
category: "m"
title: "The Black Corridor (1969); Breakfast in the Ruins. A Novel of Inhumanity (1971); The Warlord ofthe Air (1971); The Adventures of Una Persson and Catherine Cornelius in the Twentieth Century. A Romance(1976); The Cornelius Chronicles (1977)  	; The Entropy Tango. A Comic Romance (1980); The Steel Tsar (1981); The Opium General and Other Stories (1984); The Dancers at the End of Time"
author: "Michael Moorcock"
---
Michael Moorcock, described by Vittorio Curtoni as a "bizarre beatnik figure" (25), has been involved in politics for much of his life, having been first attracted, by his own account, by the anarchist movement of the 1950s (Moorcock 1983: 12). At that time he used to attend anarchist meetings in Brylcreemed hair, blazer, tie and flannels, rather than orthodox bohemian wear; contrariwise he would wear beatnik clothes to a church fete (ibid.: 75). He later joined successively Labour, Liberal, and Labour parties, finally reverting to anarchism.
 
In 1978, at Stuart Christie's request, he contributed '<a href="http://www.anarchogeekreview.com/essay/starship-stormtroopers">Starship Stormtroopers: Anarchist and Authoritarian Ideas in Science Fiction</a>' to the fourth issue of the Cienfuegos Press Anarchist Review; this article is one of the major sources on this theme,  and surely the best-known.
 
In 1983 Moorcock published his political testament,  The Retreat from Liberty. He speaks knowledgeably of historical anarchism, referring to Proudhon, Kropotkin, Stirner, Berkman, and Voline (his 1982 novel The Brothel in Rosenstrasse, which is not sf, also mentions Bakunin). Among contemporaries he refers to the British anarchists Stuart Christie, Albert Meltzer, and Nicolas Walter, and to the American Noam Chomsky. With the then marginal state of the anarchist movement, he pinned his hopes for the future on the women's movement.
 
In The Black Corridor, against the disintegration of British society, a businessman escapes into space; he is, however, progressively shown to be no better than the world he is escaping. A very bitter and pessimistic work, it does however insist on the individual's responsibility for the creation of a decent society, and the necessity for means to correspond to ends.
 
Breakfast in the Ruins is a sequence of vignettes of Karl Glogauer at dates from 1871 to 1990—key historical loci, from the Paris Commune to Vietnam, via Auschwitz. He is frequently shown, coldly, as perpetrator as well as victim of atrocities. Chapter 9 features Glogauer with the army of Nestor Makhno, the Ukrainian anarchist of the 1920s. Makhno himself is shown as miserable but reckless and cruel. The novel is shockingly amoral in presentation, but presumably with the intention of forcing a reappraisal of the reader's moral stance.
 
The Warlord of the Air is a quasi-Griffithian story of a time-traveller, airships, and a utopian community. Anarchists are prominent, but are not very favourably portrayed—they are the first, for example, to use the atomic bomb. The book slurs over the differences between socialism, communism, and anarchism, but as no more than a potboiler can't be expected to be good propaganda.  That said, <a href="http://airshipambassador.wordpress.com/2014/08/04/killjoy1/"> Margaret Killjoy</a> has described this as "the ultimate proto-steampunk, if you  ask me, and probably the punkest steampunk to date".
 
The Cornelius Chronicles constitute some of Moorcock's best work, centring on the attempts of Jerry Cornelius, a sort of transcendental hippie James Bond, to relate to the late twentieth century world. Nestor Makhno's army is again encountered. On this occasion it is in wild alliance with an army of Scottish anarchists and their fleet of a hundred airships painted in black anarchist livery and St Andrew's crosses. The opportunist Cornelius, known as a Makhnovist sympathiser, winds up as governor in Kiev. Andrew Hedgecock, writing in  Freedom in 1986, saw Cornelius as  "a template for Moorcock's ironic attacks on authoritarianism, racism and traditionally defined gender roles"; on this seminal tetralogy the author declines to editorialise, compelling enhanced reader participation—hence the  "narrative is consonant with the central notion that self discipline is a necessary condition for freedom."  Moorcock confirms this: 
 
The whole point of my fiction is to allow readers to decide for themselves their  own moral attitudes. The Jerry Cornelius stories, for instance, are pure  anarchism in their refusal to "guide" the reader in any direction. I try to set  out the material and let them decide what they think. (<a href="k.htm#Killjoy">Killjoy</a>, 2009)
This is entirely consistent with his statement, the same  year, that 
 
I remain a Kropotkinist anarchist, which many  people will see as unrealistic, but, if I’m unrealistic, so be it. I see  my anarchism as a moral position, in that it’s scarcely a realistic  political one! But from that position I can very quickly determine what  action to take. [<a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20141215223241/http:/anarchotranshumanism.com:80/2009/06/23/moorcock-on-h-and-anarchism/">Moorcock  on H+ and Anarchism</a>]
An <a href="https://freedomnews.org.uk/interview-michael-moorcock/"> interview</a> with Moorcock was published in Freedom in 1988, in  which he said
 
I began political life as an anarchist — in those  days I suppose it was a much more naive belief. I then went through a  period of trying to express myself politically through more conventional  political parties and eventually realised they are all so damn corrupt I  might as well be an idealistic anarchist and humanist and maintain my  own political position by that means. That also fits in better with my  support for the feminist movement.
In The Entropy Tango Makhno, following the success of his Ukrainian revolution, gallivants around the globe attempting insurrections in Ottawa, Yucatan, Somalia, Bohemia and Queensland, before finally being electrocuted by the Americans after looting San Francisco.  Not preachy about anarchism, but the message probably gets across.
 
The Makhnovist uprising was also successful in the parallel universe of The Nomad of Time series; in The Steel Tsar (1981), Makhno once  again appears as a character and engages in political arguments with Stalin.  Makhno also appears in Byzantium Endures (1981)—which is tagged as sf in  the <a href="http://www.cira.ch/catalogue/index.php?lvl=categ_see&amp;id=346&amp;page=1&amp;nbr_lignes=78&amp;main=&amp;l_typdoc=g,i,a"> CIRA</a> catalogue, and in LibraryThing's <a href="http://www.librarything.com/tag/anarchism,+science+fiction">tagmash</a>  for 'anarchism, science fiction'—but actually isn't.
 
Nestor Makhno also appears in The Adventures of Una Persson and Catherine Cornelius in the Twentieth Century. The Opium General and Other Stories includes a long Cornelius story and a few essays. Among the latter are the most  accessible republication in print of 'Starship Stormtroopers', and a review of a book on Makhno, whom Moorcock describes as  "a martyr to a cause that can never be lost but which the world may never  properly understand."
 
Of The Dancers at the End of Time a poster on anarchysf wrote:  "Theme is an anarchic society where all material needs have been met. There's only a few people but boy are they bored! Could be seen as an attempt to play around with a situationist  scenario?"
 
For <a href="http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/2009/10/i-wanna-be-sci-fi-anarcheeee/"> Bruce Sterling</a>, Michael Moorcock is "the gold standard in these matters, if  you ask me".
 