---
category: "m"
author: "Sam Esmail"
format: "film"
title: "Mr. Robot"
yearReleased: "TV series 2015→"
---
A disaffected hacker is recruited into a group seeking to bring down capitalism by wiping out debt. There are numerous references on the internet to the eponymous Mr Robot—the group's leader—being an 'anarchist', or even an 'insurrectionary anarchist', but this isn't supported by the programme content. Nonetheless, it's attractively anti-capitalist.
 
Briefly discussed on its own libcom.orgforum, for one poster "The politics are naive, but it was still really good." For another "Mr. Robot's excellent and as far as the politics go, it pretty accurately depicts the shitty politics of Anonymous (more or less the model for a fictional organization in the show) and the nonsense that's often passed around as 'anarchism' these days among young American activists without IMO making is seem much more appealing than it is in real life." Another thought "it's got more to do with the Occupy Wall Street thing." While a fourth dismissed it as "Blanquist cyber-anarchist fantasy", the response was that "It's recuperation, but it's interesting because somewhere along the way recuperation is going to fail just like the rest of the capitalist project."
 
There are three relevant pages onwww.reddit.com/r/Anarchism, though I ignore the first, as it predates the first transmission. The initial poster onHas anyone been watching "Mr. Robot"? was "pleased to see that the anarchist 'Mr. Robot' is not an asshat cartoon villain (which is usually how 'anarchists' are portrayed in the media)." Later comments were more sceptical: "Episode 1 was pretty okay but it's hard to take it too seriously when it's coming from USA network and packaged for prime time television"; "Beware the capitalist, they will package up your rebellion and sell it back to you in order to incorporate and defuse it. Never forget why you like it..."; "[ . . . ] nobody in the show is an anarchist why do ppl keep using that word"; "I don't really see the point, it's capitalist reformism all over again"; "The show does not play to anarchist philosophy(s), it acts as a reservoir for anyone alienated or who feels occasionally alienated by the current blah." But the last response prompted a different viewpoint: "[ . . . ] I would argue that the general anti-capitalist/anti-corporate themes do, in fact, "play to" anarchist philosophy. Nobody seems to espouse any anarchist philosophy, per se, but the fact that anarchist ideas and tendencies are the primary driver of the plot, without explicitly saying it, actually makes the show that much more subversive and effective in my opinion." A new post onMr. Robot expressed the view that "It's obviously extremely anti-capitalistic, one would maybe even say pro-anarchism, and the main characters voice-over provides us with a lot of social commentary."
 