---
category: "m"
author: "the Wachowskis"
format: "film"
title: "The Matrix"
yearReleased: "1999"
---
Set in a dystopian future in which reality as 			generally perceived is actually a simulated reality called 'the 			Matrix', created by a global machine intelligence to subdue the 			human population while their bioelectricity is used as an energy 			source. Neo, a hacker, learns this truth and joins a group of rebels 			fighting to free the harvested humans. Strongly influenced by 			cyberpunk and the work of Philip K. Dick.
 
			Freedom reviewer Chris Hurt wrote, in 2003:
 
Is The Matrix really 			bad? Actually it helped me understand the cryptic comments of the 			poststructuralists. For instance, Guy Debord's enormously 			inaccessible Society of the Spectacle has always been a 			struggle for me to get through. But after seeing the film, it all 			makes perfect sense. [ . . . ] In this sense, The Matrix is 			precisely what it advertises itself to be, a matrix. It's the 			product of a particular organisation of the relations of production 			pushing us into a state of passivity. It's founded on the separation 			of ourselves from our culture, regurgitated back at us at dizzying 			speed. Yet the film also provokes such critical thoughts as these. 			So I give it both a one and a ten out of ten.
The movie, and its sequels, was much discussed 			on the anarchysf mailing list during its active period, and still 			crops up from time to time on Facebook pages such as 'Solarpunk 			Anarchists' and the 'Anarchism and Science Fiction Forum', where in 			November 2016 three contributors listed it among their contenders 			for 'best sci-fi ever committed to film'. A discussion on the 			Anarchism						SubReddit began with using The Matrix as the benchmark 			for identifying films advocating anti-capitalism. Jesse Cohn noted 			that "some contemporary anarchists have critically endorsed" the 			film (Cohn 1999, citing Sanda 			Jeppeson, 'The Matrix; Revolution or Simulacrum in 			Hollywood?', Social Anarchism 36 (Spring 2004). Thomas 			Michaud, in his						essay on 'Science Fiction and Politics', locating The Matrix 			firmly within the field of cyberpunk, cites it is an example 			of anarchist denunciation of the use of technology to control 			people. 
 
The film is discussed at some length in Taylor 			Andrew Loy's 'Anarchy in Critical Dystopias: An Anatomy of 			Rebellion' (in Shantz). Loy says "Neo 			may begin The Matrix as 'just' a cyberpunk, but by the end he 			has also become a self-governed Anarchist.' [p205] He sees Neo's 			final voice-over as addressing both the AI and the movie audience 			itself — 
 
. . . I'm going to show them a world . . . 			without you. A world without rules and controls. Without borders or 			boundaries. A world where everything is possible. Where we go from 			there is a choice I leave to you.
— and concludes that "Not only does this 			statement clearly refer to an Anarchistic world, it is also a useful 			general description of the telos of Anarchistic rebellion: the 			perpetual generation of change and revolution without constraints." 			[p215]
 