---
title: "Avatar"
format: "film"
category: "a"
yearReleased: "2009"
author: "James Cameron"
---
Set in the mid-22nd century, when  humans are colonizing Pandora, a lush habitable moon in the Alpha  Centauri system, in order to mine the mineral 'unobtanium', a  room-temperature superconductor. The expansion of the mining colony  threatens the continued existence of a local tribe of the Na'vi, a  humanoid species indigenous to Pandora. Jake Sully is part of a team  seeking to establish contact with the Na'vi and, in avatar form, is  inducted into a local tribe. But when his corporate handlers use his  information in a violent campaign of clearance he leads a successful  resistance movement, with the help of a handful of human defectors,  and uploads his consciousness to reside permanently in his avatar  body.

The film has been of particular  interest to anarcho-primitivists. Layla AbdelRahim entitled her 2009 <a href="https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/layla-abdelrahim-avatar-an-anarcho-primitivist-picture-of-the-history-of-the-world"> review</a> 'Avatar: An Anarcho-Primitivist Picture of the History of the World'.  For her "the film’s logic has anarcho-primitivism stamped in every  scene", but she sees as a problem "that to relate the story, Cameron  uses the same machines, technologies and money that devastate the  wilderness he tells us we need to save." John Zerzan recommended  AbdelRahim's review in his 2009-12-29 <a href="https://archive.org/details/JohnZerzanAnarchyRadioTV12292009"> Anarcho Radio TV</a> video, and the film was under discussion again  during each of Zerzan's next five weekly <a href="http://johnzerzan.net/radio/archive.html">broadcasts</a>.

For <a href="http://web.archive.org/web/20150513083956/http:/zinelibrary.info/files/scifirad.pdf">_Red River Radical_</a> _Avatar_ is "hardly more than a remixed  Dances With Wolves; a watered down anti-colonization story in which a white male  is still the hero after his remake into the indigenous other. Avatar’s story revolves around a typical teenage American romance; same gender   roles, heteronormative and weirdly middle class." The article  author sees it as another example of Hollywood dumbing down.

In Glenn's 'Film as Subversion',  his essay in the 2015 _BASTARD Chronicles_, he argues that  "What makes a film subversive is determined by how well it  challenges a narrative; what makes a film propaganda is reinforcing  a narrative." For Glenn, _Avatar_ is propaganda, as it "simply  celebrates a Green/Indigenous narrative."

The film is included in Gillis's <a href="http://humaniterations.net/2009/12/31/top-10-sf-films-of-the-decade/">top ten</a> SF films of the 2000s, the reviewer noting that "Avatar’s problem is that the Navi aren’t alien in the slightest — they’re deliberately made to be recognizable as our (simplistic, essentialist, idealic) impression of indigenous americans. This is both shallow and a bit fucked up. And it’s the reason Avatar tragically falls short of being a great film.&nbsp;It is, however, a very good film."

