---
category: "r"
author: "Kim Stanley Robinson"
format: "book"
title: "'The Lucky Strike' (1984); Three Californias  trilogy: The Wild Shore (1984), The Gold Coast (1988), and Pacific Edge (1990); Mars trilogy: Red Mars (1992), Green Mars  (1993), Blue Mars (1996);Antarctica (1997); The Years of Rice and Salt (2002); Capital Code  trilogy:  Forty Signs of Rain (2004), Fifty Degrees Below (2005), Sixty Days and Counting (2007);  2312 (2012); Aurora (2015); New York 2140"
yearReleased: "(2017)"
---
From an on-line interview:
 
Faliol: Are you a libertarian anarchist?
KSRobinson: No, I am a green socialist, roughly. A utopian. Idon't like libertarianism as I understand it because it seems tokeep private property, police, and other aspects of the currentsystem, indeed it seems to keep capitalism.
Faliol: I myself agree with Chomsky's ideas.
KSRobinson: I like Chomsky's writing very much. He should bemore represented in mainstream American press; it's a sign ofhow bad they are that he isn't. But I still don't likelibertarianism. Nor anarchism either, though at least that onehas a nice idea at its heart.
Faliol: Have you read Bakunin?
KSRobinson: Yes, I have read Bakunin, maitre'd of anarchism.     (Dan Clore)

Robinson is sufficiently sympathetic to anarchism, however, to have written the introduction to the 2009Mythmakers & Lawbreakers. Anarchist writers on fiction. Here he describes himself as "a leftist, interested in opposing capitalism and to changing it to something more just and sustainable", who has "once or twice tried to depict societies with anarchist aspects or roots". He spoke on 'The Politics of Science' at the 2010 Bay Area Anarchist Bookfair, and again on 'Science and Capitalism' at the Bay Area Anarchist Bookfair in 2013.
 
In a 2018interview Robinson again gave his views on anarchism:
 
KSR I’m a statist; I don’t believe anarchism is a way to get through the next couple of centuries. I thoroughly approve of anarchism’s ultimate goal of the total horizontalisation of power but, to me, anarchism is a horizon that is centuries out.
HF At least one literary critic has coupled your name with Murray Bookchin.
KSR I’ve read Bookchin and I admire his work. I’m thinking more of anarchisms that conflate capitalism and the state. I separate them, just as I separate capitalism and science. I’m also thinking of the anti-humanism of certain anarchisms, those that turn into libertarianism very easily in an ugly way, those that say it doesn’t matter if six billion people die because then we’d have a sustainable number. What’s good in anarchism is the idea of a complete horizontalisation of power and prosperity. It’s a great long-term horizon to aim for. It’s like utopia itself. I’m a utopian, but I wouldn’t say I’m an anarchist because I don’t think a state monopoly on violence is a bad thing at this point in history. It’s better than the alternatives, better than chaos, better than the freedom to burn as much carbon as I want. I think that carbon use should be legislated and controlled and priced, and anarchy doesn’t provide a way of doing that.
'Lucky Strike' is included in Zeke Teflon's Favorite Anarchist Science Fiction Novels, where it is described as "A fine if short parallel-universes novella on the morality of 'just following orders.'" It's also included in theThink Galactic reading list. The slim PM Press edition includes an additional essay on historical determinism and alternate histories, and a useful interview with the author by Terry Bisson; this edition was "very highly recommended" in Teflon'sreview.
 
The Three Californias trilogy depicts three different futures for Orange County; forB.A. Mahrab "This series delves into the different types of future scenarios we may very well face as a species—each one completely within mankind’s ability to create now, and none of which fall outside the realm of plausible possibilities." The Gold Coast is described as an "exemplary critical dystopia" in Seyferth's 'Anarchism and Utopia'. See alsoCanavan, Klarr, and Vu, and Heer.
 
The Mars trilogy represents "Basically an anarchist revolution & construction of society" (posting to anarchysf).For Lewis Call the trilogy is "Robinson's vision of an anarchistic Mars"; Robinson's gift economy is "the most interesting anarchistic element of Robinson's meticulously detailed Martian society", "the articulation of a way of thinking about politics and economics which is radically new, and yet also profoundly old." (Call, 2002
 
Antarctica was recommended byCommon Action at the panel 'Beyond The Dispossessed: Anarchism and Science Fiction' at the Seattle Anarchist Bookfair in October 2009. Set in Antarctica in the near future, environmentalism and sustainable living are central, with much interest shown in the formation of cooperative and anarchic social systems. From the same mould as the Mars trilogy, it has been nicknamed 'White Mars'. A vivid and unforgettable paean to the cold wilderness of the continent.
 
According toone reviewer, Robinson's alternate history The Years of Rice and Salt includes a discussion of anarchist ideas of a post-scarcity economy.
 
ForMaeve66, writing for the US Solidarity, Robinson's Capital Code trilogy, on the theme of climate change, is "well worth reading, for the science, and the potentials and limitations on electoral reform as a solution to anthropogenic climate change."MB.A. Mahrab sees this trilogy, among other Robinson works, as central to the developing sub-genre of solarpunk.
 
The marvellous 2312 is included in theThink Galactic reading list, and viewed as "anarchist-themed-sci-fi" byDavid Agranoff.
 
Aurora is a generation starship novel with a powerful message from the author, namely that "Earth is the only home, and fixing our relationship with it is the only possible solution to the anthropogenic mass extinction event that we are in the process of starting." [Robinson, interviewed by Dave Haeselin]; escaping Earth's problems in this way he sees as an "impossible transcendence".Teflon's response, however, was a best lukewarm: "worth reading", and "Recommended (barely) for its political and ecological points."
 
New York 2140 is set in a water-logged New York post-climate change. Perhaps not his strongest work, but "Unfettered capitalism and the practices that led to the 2008 economic meltdown are squarely in Robinson’s crosshairs in New York 2140, where the future is no less unscrupulous than the present" [Singularity Hub]. Facebook's Anarchism and Science Fiction Forum, and Solarpunk Anarchists, drew attention to its publication.